The shape of a plant can provide insights into the processes that drive its growth. These processes depend on numerous factors, some specific to the plant, such as its genetic material, and some external to the plant, such environmental conditions. [TODO: insert argument on why it is important to study this link] However, studies to link genetic features or environmental conditions to plant traits require the detailed analysis of a large number of plants that have been grown in controlled conditions. A study of this endeavor is feasible only with automated measuring tools. 
A study into the factors that influence the plant’s morphology requires researchers to have access to an inexpensive and easy-to-use phenotyping robot. Minimum of a 100 plants a day. Automatic processing pipeline that start with image data and ends at relevant plant traits.
BILLBOARD?: We have made good progress in developing such a phenotyping station. In this paper we present its first version and the results we obtained with it in studying the phyllotaxy (the arrangement of fruits along the stem) of the Arabidopsis thaliana. 
BILLBOARD? [TO FAR AHEAD?]: Although we currently use the station indoor in a laboratory setting, some of the design choices we have made stem from a long-term effort to develops robotic tools for crop monitoring on farms. We envision to use the same tools to scan plants in the field with the goal to use this data to predict when and where a farmer will have to intervene, for example, by detected plant stress early. We also hope that the crop monitoring has other side effects. We hope that the detailed 3D scans may provide an extensive volume of plant data in outdoor conditions that complements the phenotyping research performed in laboratories.  
To bootstrap this ambitious project on a sound basis we started with the phenotyping of the Arabidopsis thaliana in indoor settings. This focus allows us to work in a well-defined context and allows us to validate our analysis results against a large body of published research data. More specifically, we are using the 3D scanner to analyse the positions of the flowers along the shoot of the Arabidopsis thaliana. The young plant first grows a rosette of leaves close to the ground. When the plant goes into flowering, its stems shoot up and flowers and fruits develop around the stem in a (mostly) spiral organisation. Between each successive flower there is a small stem and successive flowers are positioned at different horizontal angles. On average, the angle between them is 137 degrees. These angles results from an interaction between three zones of stem cells in the apical meristem and the inhibiting effect of auxin [TODO]. 
This arrangement of the fruits along the stem is not perfect and errors may appear. A common error is the inversion of the angles, where flowers with sequence numbers i=1, 2, 3, 4 at angles of 137° are produced in the order 1, 3, 2, 4 at angles 274°, 223°, and 274°. To understand whether the errors in the phyllotaxis are due to genetic expressions or to other factors, it is necessary to measure a large set of plants grow them in different conditions and compare several genetic variations of A. thaliana. We estimate that we have to scan at least hundred plants a day. Without the assistance of digital scanning tools this task is impossible to handle by a single person.
We therefore built the 3D scanner for such a phenotyping station using off-the-shelf components and open source software. The scanner consists of a main frame built of aluminium profiles. The frame occupies on area of 1.2m x 1.3m and is 2.2m high.  [DESCRIPTION SCANNER HARDWARE]  The total cost of the station is around 3000 euro. 


We developed a first data processing pipeline that takes a series of images of a single A. thaliana plant as input and that provides the list of angles and internode lengths as output. The installation uses high-resolution RGB cameras to take pictures of the plant at different angles and sends the pictures to a processing pipeline that in sequence determines the 3D shape using space carving, the boundary volume as a mesh structure using XXX, the main skeleton using active contours, the tree structure using the minimum spanning tree algorithm, and the series of angles and internodes distances through the analysis of the tree structure. Each step of the pipeline will be documented in detail below. 


The results of the 3D scanner are satisfying. We have evaluated the scanner in two ways. First, we compare the list of angles and internode distance to manual measurements on a set of stabilized, ground-truth plants. Second, we generated sets of virtual plant images that were produced using a computational model of the A. thaliana. These models provide realistic reconstructions with known properties and provide a base truth against which we can test all the intermediate steps of the scanner. 
The scanner produces results with an error margin less than the error made by a human operator. EXPAND


We also evaluated the precision of each step of the pipeline using synthetic data produced by a computational model of A. thaliana. EXPAND


The speed-up of the scanner, compared to manual measurements, is N. The new station significantly increases the number of plants that can be scanned per day. The measurement time for one physical scan (excluding the processing time) is less than two minutes. The subsequent processing time is XX (5? 10?) minutes. Time human operator. EXPAND


We believe that the phenotyping station creates new opportunities for researchers who have to analyse large sets of plants and who have a limited budget.  By democratising the access to phenotyping tools more researchers can explore novel hypotheses more quickly and efficiently. Technological developments such as the 3D scanner can unlock new research tracks that were too time consuming before and allow the genetic screening on a large scale and acquiring dataset that are needed for statistical analysis. 


The phenotyping station may also create new opportunities for professionals who would like to introduce the 3D screening of their plants in their work flow.  The new opportunities include the possibility to provide clients with high-resolution images of the high-value plants in plant nurseries, for example. In the long-run, we hope to use the in-field scanning as a predictive tool to detect plant stress or to estimate the expected harvest time and volume.