The shape of a plant can provide insights into the processes that drive its growth. These processes depend on numerous factors, some specific to the plant, such as its genetic material, and some external to the plant, such environmental conditions. [TODO: insert argument on why it is important to study this link] However, studies to link genetic features or environmental conditions to plant traits require the detailed analysis of a large number of plants that have been grown in controlled conditions. 
A study into the factors that influence the plant’s morphology requires researchers to have access to an inexpensive and easy-to-use phenotyping robot. The robot should be able to scan a minimum of a 100 plants a day, have a small footprint so that it does not require a dedicated space, and cost less than 10 000 euros so that is accessible for individual research projects. It should have an automatic processing pipeline that starts from the sensors data and outputs the relevant plant traits.
We have made good progress in developing such a phenotyping station. In this paper we report on the first version that we have built and on the results we obtained using it in our study of the phyllotaxy (the arrangement of fruits along the stem) of the Arabidopsis thaliana. Our evaluation shows that the scanner is X% faster than a human operator and that the average error on the angles is N°, which is less than the error made by manual measurements.
Although we currently use the station indoor in a laboratory setting, some of the design choices we have made stem from a long-term effort to develops robotic tools for crop monitoring on farms. We envision to use the same tools to scan plants in the field and use this data to predict when and where a farmer will have to intervene, for example, by detected plant stress early. We also hope that the in-field 3D scans of the crops may complement the data obtained by research laboratories. Although the outdoor conditions in which the plants grow cannot be controlled, contrary to the conditions in grow chambers, it is possible to collect much larger datasets.
To bootstrap this ambitious project on a sound basis we started with the phenotyping of the Arabidopsis thaliana in indoor settings. This focus allows us to work in a well-defined context and allows us to validate our analysis results against a large body of published research data. 
More specifically, we are using the 3D scanner to analyse the positions of the flowers along the shoot of A. thaliana. The young plant initially grows a rosette of leaves close to the ground. When the mature plant goes into flowering, its stems shoot up and flowers and fruits develop around the stem in a (mostly) spiral organisation. Between each successive flower there is a small stem. The successive flowers are positioned at different horizontal angles around the stem. On average, the angle between them is 137 degrees. These angles results from an interaction between three zones of stem cells in the apical meristem and the inhibiting effect of auxin in these zones [TODO]. 
This arrangement of the fruits along the stem is not perfect and errors may appear. A common error is the inversion of the angles, where flowers with sequence numbers i=1, 2, 3, 4 at angles of 137° are produced in the order 1, 3, 2, 4 at angles 274°, 223°, and 274°. 
To understand whether the errors in the phyllotaxis are due to genetic expressions or to other factors, it is necessary to measure a large set of plants. We have to analyse several genetic variations of A. thaliana grown in different conditions. We estimate that we have to scan at least hundred plants a day to obtain a statistically valid dataset. Without the assistance of digital scanning tools this task is impossible to handle by a single person.
The 3D scanner is the first step in the development of the needed phenotyping station. The scanner consists of a main frame built of aluminium profiles. The frame occupies an area of 1.2m x 1.3m and is 2.2m high.  [DESCRIPTION SCANNER HARDWARE]  The 3D scanner uses off-the-shelf components and runs open source software. [EXPAND] The total cost of the station is around 3000 euro. The task of automatically placing the potted plants in the scanner will be dealt with separately later on. 
We also implemented a first version of the data processing pipeline that takes a series of images of a single A. thaliana plant as input and that provides the list of angles and internode lengths as output. The installation uses high-resolution RGB cameras to take pictures of the plant at different angles and sends the pictures to a processing pipeline that in sequence determines the 3D shape using space carving, the boundary volume as a mesh structure using XXX, the main skeleton using active contours, the tree structure using the minimum spanning tree algorithm, and the series of angles and internodes distances through the analysis of the tree structure. Each step of the pipeline is documented in detail below. 


The results of the 3D scanner are satisfying. We have evaluated the scanner in two ways. First, we compare the list of angles and internode distance to manual measurements on a set of stabilized “ground-truth” plants. Second, we generated sets of virtual plant images that were produced using a computational model of the A. thaliana. These models provide realistic reconstructions with known properties and provide a base truth against which we can test all the intermediate steps of the scanner. 
The scanner produces results with an error margin less than the error made by a human operator.  EXPAND


We also evaluated the precision of each step of the pipeline using synthetic data produced by a computational model of A. thaliana. EXPAND


The speed-up of the scanner, compared to manual measurements, is N. The new station significantly increases the number of plants that can be scanned per day. The measurement time for one physical scan (excluding the processing time) is less than two minutes. The subsequent processing time is XX (5? 10?) minutes. Time human operator. EXPAND


We are making all information available online so that the scanner can be built and used by others. Github, development methodology, forum, ...