The shape of a plant can give you insights into the biological processes that steer its growth. These processes depend on numerous factors, some specific to the plant, such as its genetic material, and some external to the plant, such environmental conditions. A plant that has been studied extensively is the Arabidopsis thaliana. When the young plant first grows a rosetta of leaves. When it goes into flowering its stems shoot up and flowers and fruits develop around the stem in a (mostly) spiral organisation. Between each flower there is a small stem and successive flowers are positioned at different horizontal angles. On average, the angle between them is 137 degrees. This spatial organisation results from the interaction between three zones of  XXX cells in the tip of the stem and has been described in detail elsewhere. 
This arrangement of the fruits along the stem, also called its phyllotaxis, is not perfect and errors may appear. A common error is the inversion of the angles, where flowers with sequence numbers i=1, 2, 3 are produced in the order 1, 3, 2. What these errors are due to is still open for debate. Are they genetical? Or are they due to environmental factors? To answer that question we have to study the A. thaliana closely and measure the series of angles on a large number of plants, compare several genetic variations, and grow them in different conditions. Without the assistance of digital scanning tools this task is impossible to handle by a single person.
We therefore designed a 3D scanning station that can automatically analyse the phyllotaxis of the flowering A thaliana and list the series of angles and internode distances for every plant. The installation uses high-resolution RGB cameras to take pictures of the plant at different angles and sends the pictures to a processing pipeline that in sequence determines the 3D shape using space carving, the boundary volume as a mesh structure using XXX, the main skeleton using active contours, the tree structure using the minimum spanning tree algorithm, and the series of angles and internodes distances through the analysis of the tree structure. Each step of the pipeline will be documented in detail below.   
We have evaluated the scanner in two ways. First, we compare the list of angles and internode distance to manual measurements on a set of stabilized, ground-truth plants. Second, we generated sets of virtual plant images that were produced using a computational model of the A. thaliana. These models provide realistic reconstructions with known properties and provide a base truth against which we can test all the intermediate steps of the scanner. Both evaluation show that the errors of the scanner are smaller than the errors made by a human operator. 
The measurement time for one physical scan (excluding the processing time) is less than two minutes. The subsequent processing time is XX (5? 10?) minutes. Time human operator. 


The design and the software of the 3D scanner is open and free for everyone to copy and modify. The total cost of the station is around 3000 euro. Technological developments such as the 3D scanner can unlock new research tracks that were too time consuming before. It allows the genetic screening on a large scale and acquiring dataset that are needed for statistical analysis. We believe that it is important that making these tools accessible to can help researchers explore .