The last decades have witnessed the emergence of complex network science as a powerful and versatile framework. Its applications span are diverse, and span different fields, like neuroscience, social sciences, epidemiology, finance. By representing a system in terms of agents (nodes) and relationships among them (links) scientists can use tools inherited from physics, mathematics and computer science, and uncover emergent properties previously overlooked.


Network science finds applications beyond ‘hard sciences’, as, for instance, history. The historical evolution of many institutions can be represented in terms of relationships among agents. The main drawback is, however, that reliable, unbiased records are often missing, or hidden in ancient volumes. Thanks to recent digitization efforts, that might be about to change.
In this work, we study the evolution of one of the most influential religious organizations in human history: the Roman Catholic Church (RCC). Its influence stretching far out the spiritual world, the RCC has been a major political actor in the last two millennia. More than 2,000 years after its creation, the RCC remains a major political actor at both national and international scales, and represents 1.28 bn faithful around the World.


We will study the RCC by focusing on the genealogy of its highest ranking clergymen: Bishops. Within RCC's unique polity, bishops play the role of ministers, governors, ambassadors. Bishops derive their religious and administrative authority by means of uninterrupted sequence of consecrator-consecrated relations, the apostolic succession. Each new bishop always being consecrated by a group of (typically) three other bishops, thus creating a genealogy spanning several centuries. This genealogy is a perfect subject of quantitative longitudinal investigation,  as the hierarchy of the RCC has remained unchanged over the centuries. Reliable data start from the beginning of the 15th Century, and comprise more than 30,000 bishops.


Clearly links between bishops do not mark biological kinship: they represent geopolitical and doctrinal ties. This represents a problem if one wishes to use tools inherited from phylogeny to study the evolution of our genealogical network, as the inheritance mechanism is unclear and not quantitatively well defined. In order to overcome this, we need to define new genes and inheritance laws. We consider the bishops whose consecrators were unknown or outside the RCC to be the sources of our genealogy. We also suppose that each one of them carries one elementary information unit (gene) that is unique to himself. Through consecration, they then transmit their gene to other bishops. This entails a recursive inheritance mechanism by which each bishop inherits all the genes of his consecrators. We then call genome of a specific bishop the frequency pattern of source bishops he has inherited. 


Once each bishop is assigned a genome, we can study the evolution of the bishop population using tools inspired by biological and physical sciences. In particular, we use entropic measures to quantify genome similarity, and cluster bishops according to how similar their ancestry is. With that, we witness the emergence of complex spatial and temporal patterns.




We find that few source bishops are responsible for most of the current bishop genotypes. Among them a Spanish cardinal stands out: Juán Pardo de Tavera (1472-1545). At his time he held a very important post as head of the Spanish Inquisition, but he is mostly overlooked by historians and not considered a particularly founding figure. His importance in shaping the current population of RCC ministers was until now hidden, and required a quantitative approach.


Another extremely interesting result is the emergence of two large groups of bishops, which we call phenotypes, in a continuing biological analogy. These two phenotypes together comprise more than ⅔ of the historical bishop population, and more than 95% of living bishops. These phenotypes act as they were in competition to take over the bishop population. They are both of ancient origin, but while one laid dormant for centuries, being mostly confined to Eastern Europe, the other rapidly took over as the dominant one since the 16th Century. Then, during the 20th Century, driven by the globalized expansion of the Church the dormant phenotype started to take over and became the dominant one. It is now the most prevalent everywhere, and in all the most catholic countries except for Spain.