Infectious diseases are the second leading cause of death in the world, in the history many times people from over the world have been affected by devastating epidemic that had destroyed both the social and economic environment. Therefore, controlling and containing the epidemic diffusion is an important  healthcare challenge worldwide.  Public Health institutions needs  to plan and evaluate targeting strategies to prevent or contain outbreaks, epidemiological practices widely  used for doing it are disease surveillance and epidemic modeling.


Nowadays, by the increasing of the travels and urbanization,  people moves easier and more frequently. The growing complexity of the individual fluxes involves  more difficult on understanding the spatial and temporal propagation of pathogens. In this scenario, modeling epidemic spreading in order to  identify the key mechanisms of the transmission processes is always an ever-evolving challenge. 


It was proven that principal drivers of the epidemic spreading are the subpopulations structures ( e.i. geography or social structures), the human mobility and  the social interactions. Collecting this kind of  detailed informations about human behaviors  is not that easy, especially in developing countries where the mobility is highly heterogeneous. 


Metapopulation models  are spatially explicit epidemic approaches that take into account host population structure in space and associated mobility. 


Mobile phone data has recently offer the opportunity to sense individual behaviours in many aspect of daily life. It have been one of the fastest technologies over the last decade, reaching both urban and rural populations. Mobile phone data are collected by telephone companies, basically a Call Detail Record (CDR) is generated every time that an user makes a call or texts a message.  Such data have been widely used to characterize individual patterns of mobility and were recently integrated into metapopulation models to understand the spread of infectious disease epidemic, such as e. g. malaria or cholera epidemics. Little attention has however been devoted to the process of aggregation behind the extraction of the mobility flows relevant to disease propagation from high-resolution individual trajectory data. 
ff




In this paper