Extracting meaningful mobility flows from high-resolution individual trajectory data for epidemic metapopulation models  




Controlling and containing the epidemic diffusion is an important  healthcare challenge. Since early recorded history, populations have been affected by devastating epidemics that destroyed both the social and economic environments. Public Health institutions collaborate with researchers to plan and evaluate targeting strategies to prevent or contain outbreaks.There are several epidemiological practices used for doing it, an ever-evolving challenge is  modeling epidemic spreading to identify key mechanisms of the epidemic transmission processes. 


Principal drivers of the epidemic spreading are the subpopulations structures (i.e. geography or social structures) and human mobility fluxes.  Metapopulation approach is largely used in literature to assess the role of these features and their inter-correlation. The metapopulation model is a spatially explicit epidemic model that takes into account host population structure in space and associated mobility. Key ingredients needed to inform such model are census data of the host populations and the daily life behaviors of the individuals living there.


Reliable data on human behaviors and mobility are increasing substantially. They come from disparate sources: internet usage, social networks, apps and portable devices. But a lack of internet access and technology devices availability makes the data collection harder in developing countries. Mobile phone overcome this problem because their usage, over the last decade, is exploded reaching both urban and rural populations. 


Mobile phone data have been widely used by researchers to characterize individual patterns of mobility. Users generate a Call Detail Records (CDRs) every time they have a mobile phone activity (call or message). Each record contains information about the location and the time the mobile phone activity was made.


Such data were recently integrated into metapopulation models to understand the spread of infectious disease epidemic, such as e. g. malaria or cholera epidemics. Little attention has however been devoted to the process of aggregation behind the extraction of the mobility flows relevant to disease propagation from high-resolution individual trajectory data. 


We addressed this question by evaluating the impact on the modelled epidemic spreading of different aggregation to evaluate coupling probability between different locations. We selected three of the most commonly used aggregation methods to estimate the coupling based on individual mobility from mobile phone data.  They are based on: (i) is the total number of displacements between any two municipalities on two consecutive calls (Displacement D); (ii) the number of calls done by residents in each location (Location L); (iii) the most visited location of residents during daytime (Commuting C). 




By analysing mobile phone data from January -December 2013 in Senegal (9,569,425 users), we implemented 12 Origin-Destination monthly matrices (D,L,C) for each method. The single element of the matrices is the coupling probability between two locations (Origin-Destination). The key difference in the three methods is between D and the other two. In D matrices coupling probability is proportional to the probability of moving between two places. Instead, L and C are based on quantifying  the coupling between two locations as the time spent in each location.


As expected, we found the largest discrepancies between D matrices and the other two. Comparing D with the other two matrices, we found that in D the outgoing probability from a patch is much smaller (absolute relative difference >100%) and that the long-range links are more often undetected. To assess the role of such differences on disease diffusion we integrated the estimated coupling matrices in a metapopulation model that explicitly accounts for disease dispersal due to visitors to a location or to returning resident to their municipality of residence. We evaluated how the simulated epidemic behavior depends on the underlying mobility source by investigating the time to first infection in each location and the invasion epidemic paths from the seed.


Focusing on synthetic influenza-like and Ebola-like disease spreading scenario, we have seen that a global level the spreading in D is slower. In fact, the epidemic arrival time measured in D is around 100 days delayed with L and C in which is more similar and highly correlated. Furthermore, arrival time in L and C is in accord with the epidemic arrival time quantified in other works. That suggests that D overestimate the arrival time. Instead, the high similarity on the epidemic invasion trees between C,L says that all secondary visited locations during the day do not have a strong impact on the outbreak spatial propagation.




This work can provide useful insight on the impact of the evaluation of the individual trajectories. It suggests that in metapopulation models is not necessary taking tracks of all consecutive displacements of the individuals. Additionally, the impact of no-work visited locations is lower when the outbreak spreads fast. Therefore, considering only the commuting mobility flows could be a good estimation of the coupling probability between host populations.