Controlling and containing the epidemic diffusion is an important  healthcare challenge worldwide. Infectious diseases are the second leading cause of death in the world, in the history many times people from over the world have been affected by devastating epidemics that had destroyed both the social and economic environments. Public Health institutions needs  to plan and evaluate targeting strategies to prevent or contain outbreaks. There are several epidemiological practices widely used for doing it, an ever-evolving challenge is  modeling epidemic spreading to identify key mechanisms of the epidemic transmission processes.  


Metapopulation models  are spatially explicit epidemic approaches that take into account host population structure in space and associated mobility. By the increasing of the travels and urbanization  people moves easier and more frequently. The growing complexity of the individual fluxes involves  more difficult on understanding the spatial and temporal propagation of pathogens. Modern 
It was proven that principal drivers of the epidemic spreading are the subpopulations structures ( e.i. geography or social structures), the human mobility and  social interactions.




 collecting this kind of  detailed informations about human behaviors  is not that easy, especially in developing countries where the mobility is highly heterogeneous.






Mobile phone data has recently offer the opportunity to sense individual behaviours in many aspect of daily life. It have been one of the fastest technologies over the last decade, reaching both urban and rural populations. Mobile phone data are collected by telephone companies, basically every time that an user makes a call or texts a message a Call Detail Record (CDR) is generated.  Such data have been widely used to characterize individual patterns of mobility and were recently integrated into metapopulation models to understand the spread of infectious disease epidemic, such as e. g. malaria or cholera epidemics. Little attention has however been devoted to the process of aggregation behind the extraction of the mobility flows relevant to disease propagation from high-resolution individual trajectory data. 


In this paper, we answer  this question by considering three of the most commonly used methods that estimate the coupling between different locations based on individual mobility from CDRs. They are based on: (i) the number of calls done by residents in each location (location L matrix); (ii) the most visited location of residents during daytime (commuting C matrix); (iii) the total number of displacements between any two municipalities on two consecutive calls (displacement D matrix). By analyzing the estimated monthly matrices from January-December 2013 data of CDRs in Senegal (9,569,425 users), we found the largest discrepancies between the D matrices, that considers explicitly all the individual daily displacements at high granularity, and the other two, that consider the probability to move from the home location to all the other municipalities (L) and to the most visited location (C), respectively. 




Comparing D with the other two matrices, we found that in D the outgoing probability from a patch is much smaller (absolute relative difference >100%) and that the long-range links are more often undetected. To assess the role of such differences on disease diffusion we integrated the estimated coupling matrices in a metapopulation model that explicitly accounts for disease dispersal due to visitors to a location or to returning resident to their municipality of residence. We evaluated how the simulated epidemic behavior depends on the underlying mobility source by investigating the time to first infection in each location and the invasion epidemic paths from the seed.


Focusing on synthetic influenza-like and Ebola-like disease spreading scenario, we have seen that a global level the spreading in D is slower. In fact, the epidemic arrival time measured in D is around 100 days delayed with L and C in which is more similar and highly correlated. Furthermore, the arrival time in L and C is in accord with the epidemic arrival time quantified in other works validated with commuting data from developed countries. That suggests that D overestimate the arrival time. Instead, the high similarity on the invasion trees between C,L say that all secondary visited locations during the day do not have a strong impact on the outbreak spatial propagation.




This work can provide useful insight on the impact of the evaluation of the individual trajectories. It suggest that working a global level, using metapopulation models, it is not necessary taking track of all consecutive displacements. Additionally, faster is the outbreak less is the impact of the no-work visited locations. This suggests the epidemic diffusion for the outbreak with an high basic reproductive number considering in the mobility only the commuting network could be a good approximation.