The need for AI based interactive tools for music composition




Nowadays, artificial intelligence has opened exciting perspectives in various domains such as artistic creation. Indeed, computer science has reached a point where machine learning models are able of producing realistic and touching work of art as shown by the example of The Next Rembrandt. This project led by Delft university aimed at creating a totally new painting in the style of the famous Dutch painter with the help of AI. While this latter is increasingly used for visual art, music has not adopted this new technology element yet.


However, musicians and composers are no stranger to change. They came a long way from the time of gregorian chants or middle age musical stories, where musical traditions were transmitted orally. Writing music has led the way for newer ways to compose, providing the ability to create more complex pieces while ensuring their reproducibility. More recently, synthesizers have also contributed to the emergence of new styles such as electronic music. For the musical diversity to increase even more, our generation has to address how to incorporate the new paradigm of machine learning into music creation.


Therefore, research is being conducted on AI tools for music, particularly for composition. Indeed, computers have the incredible ability to infer music theory as mathematical structures by analysing of a huge corpus of existing pieces. This learning process allows them to compose melodies and write scores despite being logic machines deprived from human feelings. Hence, one could question both the ethic and the relevance of such tools, wondering if AI-based tools could steal the work of human composers.


A clue for answering is that currently developed tools for music composition are working in a similar fashion of human brain: they take advantage of the huge amount of available musical data to infer rules for music composition, but they do it way faster. That is why, at first glance, one could think that using AI is cheating and it could lead to stealing the work of composers, just as robots replaced most production workers. Nevertheless, some differences are to observe in the context of music and art in general


Therefore, they are doing a similar job as a composer that would analyze everything he listens to in order to find inspiration, but way faster given the computational power computers dispose. That is why, at first glance, one could think that using AI is cheating and it could lead to stealing the work of composers. However, this answer has to be completed with the answer to a second question: is technical knowledge sufficient to generate “artistic” pieces?


In fact, looking at contemporary paintings, all of us have already thought that art does not consists in the final product only but also on the innovative approach one has adopted. Therefore, AI generating full musical pieces won’t be considered as art anymore as soon as the novelty fades. Moreover, there is no particular interest in removing the human from the fun process that is music composition. Hence, we can think of a more sustainable way to involve AI in music composition through interactivity. To think AI as assisting tools for music rather than bionic composers is indeed a more exciting perspective since they would provide suggestions, keeping the human composer the decision-maker at the very heart of the composing process. 


In addition, such tools would also allow people with no knowledge in music theory to express their creativity and to compose their own music pieces.