The need for AI-based interactive tools for music composition




Nowadays, artificial intelligence has opened exciting perspectives in various domains such as artistic creation. Indeed, computer science has reached a point where machine learning models are able of producing realistic and touching work of art. As an example, we can cite the success of The Next Rembrandt, a project led by Delft university that used AI to create a totally new painting in the style of the famous Dutch painter. Indeed, AI is increasingly used for visual art, music has not adopted this new technology element yet.


Therefore, research is being conducted on AI tools for music composition, but they raise a problem. Computers have the incredible ability to infer music theory by analysing a huge corpus of existing pieces. Through this analysis, they learn how to compose melodies and write scores without any human intervention. As a result, Sony CSL developed a tool able to generate music in the style of Bach by analyzing a corpus of his music. This must lead us all to question the ethic of using such tools: could AI steal the work of human composers?


At first glance, one might think that using AI amounts cheating. Indeed, given the huge computational power they dispose, AI algorithms can be faster than humans for analyzing and learning music. If they are well designed, they can re-use a huge number of learnt techniques to generate a whole new piece in no time. Just as robots replaced most production workers, AI could indeed steal the work of composers. 


However, one has to notice a major difference: human inspiration has little to do with the logic and computational reasoning performed by computers. For example, being aware of an audience is still an exclusive human feature that allows an artist to adapt by diverging from an initial plan, while a computer program only follows the stream of instructions. As a result of this static behavior, computers are not yet suited for autonomous creation. AI is very good at reproducing existing musical genres but


Hence, heading towards interactivity might be the optimal solution to include AI into art creation. To think AI as assisting tools for music rather than bionic composers is indeed a more exciting perspective. They could provide suggestions or embody a theoretical opinion while keeping the human composer the decision-maker, at the very heart of the composing process. In addition, such music literate tools could help people with no knowledge in music theory to express their creativity and to compose their own music pieces.


Despite some people’s reluctance to go towards technology, music inevitably will. After all,  musicians and composers are no stranger to change. They came a long way from the time of Gregorian chants or middle age musical stories, where musical traditions were transmitted orally. Writing music has led the way for newer ways to compose, so did synthesizers that contributed to the emergence of new styles such as electronic music. To keep increasing musical diversity, our generation has to tame the new perspectives offered by technology and to use them to make art greater