The need for AI-based interactive tools for music composition




Nowadays, artificial intelligence has opened exciting perspectives in various domains such as artistic creation. Indeed, computer science has reached a point where machine learning models are able of producing realistic and touching work of art. As an example, we can cite The Next Rembrandt, a project led by Delft university aimed at using AI to create a totally new painting in the style of the famous Dutch painter. Indeed, AI is increasingly used for visual art, music has not adopted this new technology element yet.


Therefore, research is being conducted on AI tools for music composition, but they raise a problem. Computers have the incredible ability to infer music theory by analysing a huge corpus of existing pieces. Through this analysis, they learn how to compose melodies and write scores without any human intervention. As a result, Sony CSL developed a tool able to generate music in the style of Bach by analyzing a corpus of his music. The same principle could be applied to current music to generate pop hit songs. Hence, one could question the ethic of using such tools: could AI steal the work of human composers?








Indeed, given the computational power they dispose, AI algorithms can be way faster than humans for analyzing music. That is why, at first glance, one could think that using AI amounts cheating and could result in stealing the work of composers, just as robots replaced most production workers. Nevertheless, one has to notice a major difference: human inspiration has little to do with the logic and computational reasoning performed by computers. For example, being aware of an audience is still an exclusive human feature that allows us to diverge from our initial plan, while a computer executes a stream of instructions. This fundamental point leads us to formulate a second question: is knowledge sufficient to generate piece of art?


In fact, musicians and composers are no stranger to change. They came a long way from the time of gregorian chants or middle age musical stories, where musical traditions were transmitted orally. Writing music has led the way for newer ways to compose, so did synthesizers that contributed to the emergence of new styles such as electronic music. To keep increasing musical diversity, our generation has to address how to incorporate the new paradigm of machine learning into music creation.


In fact, looking at contemporary paintings, all of us have already thought that art does not consists in the final product only but also on the innovative approach one has adopted. Therefore, AI generating full musical pieces won’t be considered as art anymore as soon as the novelty fades. Moreover, because music composition is fun, our goal is the opposite of removing humans from it. Hence, interactivity might be the optimal solution to include AI into art creation. To think AI as assisting tools for music rather than bionic composers is indeed a more exciting perspective since they would provide suggestions, keeping the human composer the decision-maker at the very heart of the composing process. 


In addition, such tools would also allow people with no knowledge in music theory to express their creativity and to compose their own music pieces.