The need for AI based interactive tools for music composition




Nowadays, artificial intelligence has opened exciting perspectives in various domains such as artistic creation. Indeed, computer science has reached a point where machine learning models are able of producing realistic and touching work of art as shown by the example of The Next Rembrandt. This project led by Delft university aimed at creating a totally new painting in the style of the famous Dutch painter with the help of AI. While this latter is increasingly used for visual art, music is still lacking that new technologic layer.


However, musicians and composers are not stranger to change. They came a long way from gregorian chants or middle age musical stories from the time where musical traditions were transmitted orally. Writing music has led the way for newer ways to compose, providing the ability to create more complex pieces while ensuring their reproducibility. More recently, synthesizers have also greatly changed music. To continue towards technical progresses in music, our generation has to address how to incorporate the new paradigm of machine learning into music creation.


For this purpose, research is being conducted on AI tools for music composition. Indeed, computers being logic machines deprived from feelings, they have the incredible ability to extract music theory as mathematical structures out of huge corpuses of existing pieces. Hence, some experienced composers might be questioning both the ethic and the relevance of such tools, which raises an important question: should AI-based tools be perceived as stealing the work of human composers.


A track for answering the first question is that currently developed tools for music composition are working in a similar fashion of human brain: they take advantage of the huge amount of available musical data to infer rules for music composition. Therefore, they are doing the exact same job as a composer that would analyze everything he listens to in order to find inspiration, but way faster given the computational power they dispose. That is why, at first glance, one could argue that using AI is cheating and it could lead to stealing the work of composers. However, this answer has to be completed with the answer to a second question: is AI able to generate “artistic” pieces.


In fact, art often does not consists in the final product only but also on the innovative approach one has adopted. Therefore, AI generating full musical pieces might not be considered as art anymore as soon as the novelty fades. Moreover, there is no real interest in removing the human from music composition since composing is very fun. Hence, we can think of a more sustainable way to involve AI in music composition through interactivity. To think AI as assisting tools for music rather than bionic composers is actually a more exciting perspective since they would keep the human composer at the very heart of the composing process. Moreover, such tools would also allow people that are creative but have no knowledge in music theory to compose their own music pieces.


To involve AI in artistic processes should then not be feared as long as it aims at widening the scope of creative possibilities rather than reducing it.