Robotics is envisioned as a revolution for the coming years impacting work conditions as well as our daily life. It is also announced as a major factor in bringing a new green revolution to the agriculture sector. Very much like the first green revolution of the 60s which built on the advances of the chemical industry and on the mechanization, some argue that such technology is a solution to the challenge of feeding 9 billion people by 2050. It is also much needed by farmers who have difficulties in finding workers for some of the tasks of agriculture which are time consuming and painful. Recent years have seen the emergence of robots dedicated to various tasks in agriculture. Often, these are big machines, as working in fields requires a robust setup and high power, and they are dedicated to a single culture. The agroequipment sector have to make few adjustments to get their traditional machines autonomous but it is a continuation of the technology they used to develop.


A different approach to the problem, departing from the traditional agroequipment industry, has emerged recently with projects focusing on lightweight platforms. These are interesting as they bring new concepts and could provide the basis of a much more radical change in agricultural practices. At first sight, having small robots may not seem efficient to cover the wide areas of today’s farms but some projects propose to combine several of these robots working in cooperation. More importantly, a small robot is of great interest for microfarms (less than 5ha) which are a much overlooked sector of agriculture regarding to technology. UN and various other organizations emphasized the role of small farms in the development of a sustainable agriculture. There is a growing trend, at least in Europe, of young people settling on small farms, pursuing an agriculture respectful of the environment while being keen to adopting new technologies. It is thus crucial that robotics platforms are developed for this context.


There are with multiple drawbacks to using big machines, even for larger farms. The maintenance on these machine is very difficult, think of a big tractor stuck in the mud. Moreover, due to their weight, they have a huge impact on soil compaction reducing the fertility of the soil. Big machines have made their time and are often oversized for the task at hand, especially in microfarms. The powerful tractors found in today’s farms have a life expectancy that is much greater than their owners and often have way to much power. The run for more powerful and heavy machines should be redirected to a development of modular and intelligent platforms.


The modularity of new robots is a great shift from traditional machines which are specialized for a single task. A robot that is easily reconfigurable results in a lower cost compared to the investment in multiple machines each having a specific purpose. Moreover, farmers have the know-how to repair and customize the platforms and it should be encouraged.  


The shift to intelligent machines is a challenging one in environmental conditions full of uncertainties such as encountered in agriculture. It will rely on a set of sensors and on the capabilities of artificial intelligence. Among others, there are at least three domains were the intelligent robot is useful : the navigation, the mapping of relevant data from the field and the possible intervention it would take on crops.
Various sensors are used for controlling the robot and its navigation. A first option is to rely on very precise GPS signals and to control the motors so that it follows a predefined trajectory. A very precise GPS comes at a high cost and the reliability of the signal can be quite low depending on the weather conditions or if the robot is in a greenhouse. A possible alternative is to complement a cheap GPS with additional sensors like 3d sensors (Lidar), cameras (eventually stereo), inertial measurement unit (IMU) and wheel encoders to build a much more robust navigation system. These sensors are then fed to a controller to follow crop rows or the various signals are fused for the precise positioning of the robot. 


Small robots also have an advantage over systematic mode of operation of traditional machines in that they can map the field and bring detailed information to the farmers about their crops. These informations are then used to have targeted interventions or to help in planning and predicting the harvest. The mapping of properties of the plant may help detect plant stress or heterogeneity in the soil for example using multispectral cameras. These informations are extremely useful for farmers. 


An example of physical intervention made possible by robots is the precise weeding of  crops. Equipped with a camera, the robot takes pictures of its workspace. A lighting system is sometimes used to get images with uniform contrast. Detection of weeds and crops is then performed using handcrafted features or neural networks. A precise spraying or mechanical weeding can be directed to the target weeds to reach a clean culture bed. 


The evaluation of these tools is crucial for getting the farmers’ interest. It important to discuss with them the scenarios where the robots will be used to develop technologies which are appropriate. It should also be discussed with them how the introduction of robots in fields will affect their farming practices. The reliability of artificial intelligence in uncertain environments such as fields is still an active subject of research and the farmers should be aware that there remains many problems to be solved before an autonomous robot may evolve in their fields. Before robots are deployed in a productive environment, many explorative experiments will be required.