Modelling of evolution from molecules to species


Like all grand scientific theories, the theory of biological evolution is based on very few initial assumptions. These are: inheritance, variation in offspring and natural selection. A very clean framework eventually allowing to answer the most fundamental question in natural sciences - how the thing came to be as we see them? How birds become so colourful? Why there are two sexes? Not one. Or seven. Why there is only one type of oxygen-transporting protein and thousands of types of virus-detection proteins?


But when Charles Darwin laid out the foundations of natural selection, that is widely accepted even today, it was still unknown what is the agent of inheritance and how variation emerges in populations. It was not until 1930’s when the concept of a gene was proposed and a discovery was made that these genes are embedded in the sequence of monomers of the polymeric structure of deoxyribonucleic acids - the DNA. The gene concept is underpinning both: inheritance and variation. Every inheritable trait has its roots in genes, whether it is glucose degradation by an enzyme or the length of a bird’s beak. And mutations of genes introduce variation. If you have a hypothesis, you just need to go out in the field and do an experiment, as experimenting is the bread and butter of all natural sciences.


But experimenting with biological evolution it is difficult, expensive and time-consuming. To draw firm conclusions from the experiments they need to involve large cohorts of organisms or need to be run for a very long time. Preferably both. The most famous is the Escherichia coli long-term evolution experiment established by Richard Lenski in 1988 and still running. It brought its most stunning results in its 3rd decade when bacteria evolved the ability to feed on a substance called citrate, which wild-type E. coli are famously incapable of doing. And E. coli are microorganisms doubling their population size in a couple of hours when kept in favourable conditions. In vertebrates, that reproduce every couple of weeks at best, an evolutionary experiment of this type would take longer than humans live.


Enter the computer simulation. Since the invention of the transistor in the 1940’s electrical engineering developed computers from fast calculators capable of predicting cannon ball’s trajectory before it will hit the target (an anecdote often told how the idea was advertised to military officials to gain their financial support) to machines able to simulate car traffic in New Your City. In real time. Flawlessly. The flawless computation of an enormous quantity of data makes computers so appealing to a theoretical biologist. Many switched from pen and paper to keyboards and silicon.


There are many ways to design a simulation, but one particular approach became very popular: agent-based modelling (ABM). ABMs were first championed in economic sciences and as it tried to represent real people as, well, individual humans. But the agents (humans) are expressed just as a few numbers relevant to the study case: age, sex, probability of avoiding taxes etc. And there are a handful of rules how agents behave. The same approach can be used in evolutionary studies. Instead of cultivating bacteria for 30 years, you can simulate them for 2 hours. You just need to know which of the bolts and cogs of the genetic machinery are the crucial ones. Create an ‘in-silico’ bactria and let them live.


But the years of research have unveiled a world of unimaginable complexity associated with genes! The path from the molecular structure of a strap of DNA to an enzyme involves a large number of intermediate steps: first, the fragments of DNA (which is a rather large molecule) have to be re-written into a more handy piece of information - the mRNA molecule small enough to be conveniently moved around the cell. But mRNAs are not one-to-one copies of their templates. Eukaryotic genes are divided into a small number of pieces called introns that code for something and exons that are ‘just’ spacers. The process of assembling a mature mRNA is called splicing, and it can be done in a number of alternative ways omitting some introns. One piece of DNA can produce a couple of non-identical forms of mRNA. And after this, other complications come like chemical stability thus longevity of mRNA and how they are moved around. Translation of the mRNA into protein. Post-translational modifications of the protein. Assembling a multi-protein enzyme...  And the regulatory genes, e.g. the ones that regulate the size of a bird’s beak, are even more complicated.


One of the most exciting problems that illustrate the need to work out the way how to link molecular mechanism to natural selection on a population level is the case of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) genes. MHCs are a class of proteins found in all vertebrates responsible for detection and presentation to the immune system of foreign peptides thus protecting an animal against many pathogens: from viruses to skin parasites. MHCs also are subjected to sexual selection - animals unconsciously consider them when selecting their mates. Including humans. There are over 10 thousands of MHC gene variants in the human population, and numbers are similar in other species. Why there are so many of MHC types? This has been puzzling evolutionary biologist for decades. But MHCs are vertebrate-only genes. Microorganisms do not have them so experiments like Lenski’s with E. coli will not work. 




In 2004 a group of computer scientists and biologists suggested a shorthand. Sure, there is complicated biochemistry behind the MHC protein binding the virus protein and signalling that to the immune system. But everything boils down to a key-and-lock problem. Do they fit each other? And that is a known puzzle. Researchers proposed to represent MHCs and viral proteins as strings of zeros and ones, e.g. 00010101011110. These are called bit-strings, and their arithmetics is a well-known problem in mathematics. If they are the same - they fit, and the virus is detected and destroyed. If different - virus gets to infect its host. By selecting the length of bit-strings, one can fine-tune the properties of the model. This approach has been used to tackle questions as: how the number of virus species impacts the number of MHC types in population? How sexual selection shapes MHC repertoire? How mutation rates influence MHC genes numbers?


But there are also problems. One is the problem where analogies between the models and the real biological system end? When bit-strings stop to represent proteins and are just strings of zeros and ones? The other is the limit of human understanding. Biology graduate students are traditionally trained in statistics but not in advanced mathematics, and they can be either alluded in believing the wrong models or, many biologists do, reject them altogether. 


Despite issues, the research community sees the opportunity, and new disciplines emerge: few universities opened courses in ‘computational biology’ teaching students both, the language of math, and the language of biology. Instead of relying on physicists, mathematicians and computer scientists who have to learn the biology part of their job from scratch a new cohort of scientist will advance evolutionary biology to the level of mathematisation physics and chemistry achieved in 17th and 20th century respectively.