Modelling modern socio-technical systems as creative processes.


Modern socio-technical systems are inherently complex and so is their dynamical evolution. Indeed, their are composed by a large number of elements interacting at different temporal and spatial time scales. For example, the mobility pattern of a city may be affected by road conditions or particular events happening in certain neighborhoods. In the same way, our social network evolves in an unpredictable way when we meet a new person or we change our routine. To understand the functioning of these systems is a challenging task that we can now tackle thanks to the large availability of digital logs recording many contexts of human activity.


Despite this wealth of data, the modelling frameworks proposed so far do not give a clear explanation of the mechanisms shaping the structure and dynamics of such systems. Most of the proposed models focus on the reproduction of some statistical properties of the system under investigation, like the degree distribution of a social network. Others instead, try to reproduce more characteristics at once of the system by plugging arbitrary, data-driven evolution rules into the models, increasing their complexity and explainability. The lack of interpretable, first principle based models calls for the development of alternative approaches able to unveil the underlying processes that shape the structure and dynamical evolution of these systems.


We fill this gap by proposing a new modelling framework that builds on the innovation dynamics to describe the evolution of systems as diverse as social networks and human mobility patterns. We start from the Kauffman’s adjacent possible theory to develop a first-principles based model able to reproduce the decision processes that people apply when choosing i) their interacting partner in a social event, and, ii) their mobility pattern within a city. To this end, we apply a paradigmatic change in the way these systems are usually described. For instance, we model the social life of a person as the sequence of explorative events that she undergoes in a space of possible social interactions. This space can be seen as the collections of all the possible past, current and future interactions that a person may have and is explored by gradually gaining access to elements of it that the user did not see before. Every time the user undergoes a new experience she automatically have access to new experience that were not reachable before, just like we gain access to new connections every time we meet new person. This process goes under the name of correlated novelties, as one novelty paves the way for another.


We can apply this modelling framework to a large array of different socio-technical systems. For instance, we showed that a modified Polya urn model can describe many of the key empirical observables of human social networks in contexts as diverse as mobile phone calls, scientific co-authorship networks and contacts between Twitter users. The model reproduces the microscopic decision rule that people apply when determining the recipient of their next social interaction as well as the global organization of users in tightly connected communities linked by weak ties. The model also allows to gain useful insights about the fundamental properties of these social systems and about the different behavior that people adopt in different social context: more explorative in online social networks where connections are cheap or exploiting a restricted number of pals in more classic social context such as mobile phone calls.


In the same way, the model is able to reproduce the dynamical properties of human mobility, users behavior on online collaborative platforms and online music consumption. This is done by simply mapping the items embedded in the space being explored by humans to the context under investigation. This space may contain the districts of a city that a person can explore, the music tracks she can listen to and so on.


The finding that a unique modelling framework is able to describe diverse socio-technical systems calls for additional research work on this topic. For example, the model can be extended to account for other human explorative dynamics, such as news consumption or product recommendation. Also, we aim at improving the model to account for evolution forecast and to feature solid validation procedures. On the same page, the model should be able to handle perturbations and disruptures of the underlying system.


This tasks pose some fundamental challenges. First, the topology of the space being explored is undefined. Second, its evolution is tightly correlated with the dynamical processes taking place on its fabrics, as the space that a user can explore continuously changes as he explores new regions of the space. Finally, the empirical measure and validation of the proposed mechanism is delicate, as one has to disentangle every single decision process that a person applies during her explorative story. Thus, there is also the need to  develop novel experimental platforms to probe humans’ explorative and creative processes.  


Despite these complications the potential impact of this modelling framework is high. The latter would fill the need of first principles based models that can be easily interpreted to describe and monitor evolving social systems. Besides, it would represent a valuable decision support tool for decision makers, so that it could assist stakeholders to design efficient and sustainable policies. In the end, the unravelling of fundamental mechanisms shaping the human dynamics will make room for improvements in the organization and management of our everyday’s life.