Modelling modern socio-technical systems as creative processes.


Modern socio-technical systems are inherently complex and so is their dynamical evolution. Indeed, their are composed by a large number of elements interacting at different temporal and spatial time scales. For example, the mobility pattern of a city may be affected by road conditions or particular events happening in certain neighborhoods. In the same way, our social networks evolve in an unpredictable way when we meet a new person or we change our routines. The recent availability of extensive digital records tracking human activities in different contexts makes it possible to understand the functioning of these systems at an unprecedented level of detail.


Despite this wealth of data, the modelling frameworks proposed so far do not give a clear explanation of the mechanisms shaping the structure and dynamics of such systems. Most of the proposed models focus on the reproduction of some statistical properties of the system under investigation, like the degree distribution of a social network. Others try to reproduce more feature of a system at once by plugging data-driven evolution rules into the model. This increase the model complexity and reduce its explicability. This lack of simple and interpretable models calls for the development of alternative approaches providing a clear explanation of the processes that carve the fabric of these complex systems.


We fill this gap by proposing a first-principles modelling framework able to describe the evolution of such systems. This framework reproduces the decision processes that people apply when choosing, for example, their interacting partner in a social event or their mobility pattern within a city. The model leverages on simple rules derived from innovation dynamics and Kauffman’s adjacent possible theory. This different approach requires a description of these systems from a new perspective. For instance, the social life of a person is modelled in terms of a sequence of explorative events that she undergoes in the space of all her possible connections. This space can be seen as the set of all the possible past, current and future interactions that a person may have. Individuals explore this space by getting in contact with either old (already seen) or new (fresh) elements. The latter grant them access to new experiences that were not at hand before, just like when we gain access to new connections every time we meet a new person. This process goes under the name of correlated novelties: every novelty we experience paves the way for another. 


This modelling framework fits the structural and dynamical properties of many socio-technical systems. For instance, we show that we can use it to describe key empirical observables of social networks in contexts as diverse as mobile phone calls, scientific co-authorship networks and contacts between Twitter users. The model reproduces both the decision rule that people apply when determining their next social interaction and the global organization of users in tightly connected communities linked by weak ties. The model also detects the different behavior that people adopt depending on the social context: explorative in online social networks and more exploiting a restricted number of links in the more formal context of mobile phone calls.


The model also recreates the dynamical properties of human mobility, users behavior within online collaborative platforms and online music consumption. The model can be adapted from one case to the other by simply mapping the items embedded in the space being explored by humans to the specific context under investigation: the space may contain the districts of a city that a person can explore, the music tracks she can listen to and so on.


The finding that a unique modelling framework is able to describe diverse socio-technical systems calls for additional research work on this topic. For example, the model can be extended to account for other human explorative dynamics, such as news consumption or product recommendation. Also, we aim at improving the model to forecast the systems’ evolution and equip it with solid validation procedures. On the same page, the model should be able to handle perturbations and disruptures of the underlying system.


These tasks pose some fundamental challenges. First, the topology of the space being explored is undefined. Second, the evolution of the space is strongly correlated with the dynamical processes taking place on its structure, as the region that a user can explore increases as she explores new parts of the space. Finally, the empirical measure and validation of the model is tricky, as it requires the measurement of an explorative process. This calls for the development of innovative experimental platforms to probe humans’ explorative processes.  


Despite these complications the potential impact of this modelling framework is high. It would fill the need of first-principles based models that can be easily interpreted to describe and monitor evolving social systems. Besides, it would represent a valuable decision support tool for decision makers, assisting them to design efficient and sustainable policies. In the end, the unravelling of fundamental mechanisms shaping the human dynamics will make room for improvements in the organization and management of our everyday’s life.