Modelling modern socio-technical systems as creative processes.


Modern socio-technical systems are inherently complex and so is their dynamical evolution. Indeed, their are composed by a large number of elements interacting at different temporal and spatial time scales. For example, the mobility pattern of a city may be affected by road conditions or particular events happening in certain neighborhoods. In the same way, our social network evolves in an unpredictable way when we meet a new person or we change our routine. To understand the functioning of these systems is a challenging task that we can now tackle thanks to the large availability of digital logs recording many context of human activity.


Despite this wealth of data, the modelling frameworks proposed so far do not catch the underlying mechanisms shaping the structure and dynamics of such systems. Indeed, most of the proposed models focus on the reproduction of some statistical properties of the system under investigation, like the degree distribution of a social network. Other approaches try to reproduce more characteristic of the system at the cost of increasing model complexity and by superimposing arbitrary rules to the model. The situation calls for the development of alternative approaches able to unveil the underlying processes that shape the structure and dynamical evolution of these systems.


We aim at filling this gap by proposing a new modelling framework that builds on the innovation dynamics to describe the evolution of systems as diverse as social networks and human mobility patterns. We borrow ideas from the 
: experiences, series of exploration, innovation, local/global dynamics.


Current results are encouraging: different systems (mobility, music exploration etc.) but same concept applies.


Challenges: unknown structure of space, difficult evaluation and validation in field.


Future directions: insert the forecast, include perturbations and disruptures, make it predictive and accountable for policy making.