Modelling modern socio-technical systems as creative processes.


Modern socio-technical systems are inherently complex and so is their dynamical evolution. Indeed, their are composed by a large number of elements interacting at different temporal and spatial time scales. For example, the mobility pattern of a city may be affected by road conditions or particular events happening in certain neighborhoods. In the same way, our social networks evolve in an unpredictable way when we meet a new person or we change our routines. The recent availability of extensive digital records tracking human activities in different contexts makes it possible to understand the functioning of these systems at an unprecedented level of detail.


Despite this wealth of data, the modelling frameworks proposed so far do not give a clear explanation of the mechanisms shaping the structure and dynamics of such systems. Most of the proposed models focus on the reproduction of some statistical properties of the system under investigation, like the degree distribution of a social network. Others plugs empirically observed try to reproduce more characteristics of the system at once by plugging data-driven evolution rules into the models, increasing their complexity and explicability. The lack of interpretable, first principle based models calls for the development of alternative approaches able to give a clear explanation of the processes that carve the fabric of these systems.


We fill this gap by proposing a new modelling framework leveraging on innovation dynamics to describe the evolution of these heterogeneous systems. We start from the Kauffman’s adjacent possible theory to develop a first-principles based model able to reproduce the decision processes that people apply when choosing, for example, their interacting partner in a social event or their mobility pattern within a city. To do so, we have to describe these systems from a new perspective. For instance, the social life of a person is modelled in terms of a sequence of explorative events that she undergoes in a space of all her possible social connections. This space can be seen as the collections of all the possible past, current and future interactions that a person may have and  the person gradually explores it by getting in contact with new, fresh elements never saw before. Every time an user undergoes a new item in this space, she is granted access to new experiences that were not at hand before, just like we gain access to new connections every time we meet a new person. This process goes under the name of correlated novelties, as every novelty we experience paves the way for another.


This modelling framework fits the structural and dynamical properties of many socio-technical systems. For instance, we show that a modified Polya urn model can describe key empirical observables of social networks in contexts as diverse as mobile phone calls, scientific co-authorship networks and contacts between Twitter users. This model reproduces the decision rule that people apply when determining the recipient of their next social interaction as well as the global organization of users in tightly connected communities linked by weak ties. The models also gives valuable insights on the different behavior that people adopt in different social context: more explorative in online social networks --- where the establishment of a new connection requires less  effort --- and more prone to the exploitation of a restricted number of links in the more formal context of mobile phone calls.


The model is also able to recreate the dynamical properties of human mobility, users behavior within online collaborative platforms and online music consumption. The model can be adapted from one case to the other by simply mapping the items embedded in the space being explored by humans to the specific context under investigation: the space may contain the districts of a city that a person can explore, the music tracks she can listen to and so on.


The finding that a unique modelling framework is able to describe diverse socio-technical systems calls for additional research work on this topic. For example, the model can be extended to account for other human explorative dynamics, such as news consumption or product recommendation. Also, we aim at improving the model to account for evolution forecast and to feature solid validation procedures. On the same page, the model should be able to handle perturbations and disruptures of the underlying system.


These tasks pose some fundamental challenges. First, the topology of the space being explored is undefined. Second, the evolution of the space is strongly correlated with the dynamical processes taking place on its structure, as the region that a user can explore increases as she explores new parts of the space. Finally, the empirical measure and validation of the proposed model is delicate, as one has to disentangle every single decision process that a person applies during her explorative story. Thus, we also face the need to develop novel experimental platforms to probe humans’ explorative and creative processes in an unbiased way.  


Despite these complications the potential impact of this modelling framework is high. The latter would fill the need of first-principles based models that can be easily interpreted to describe and monitor evolving social systems. Besides, it would represent a valuable decision support tool for decision makers, assisting them to design efficient and sustainable policies. In the end, the unravelling of fundamental mechanisms shaping the human dynamics will make room for improvements in the organization and management of our everyday’s life.