In a 2018 interview, Tim Barners-Lee, the inventor of the World Wide Web, said: “for many years there was a feeling that the wonderful things on the web were going to dominate and we’d have a world with less conflict, more understanding, more and better science, and good democracy”. Nowadays, instead, “humanity connected by technology on the web is functioning in a dystopian way. We have online abuse, prejudice, bias, polarisation, fake news, there are lots of ways in which it is broken.” Apparently, something is rotten in the state of the Internet. Recently, even the Office of the High Commisioner for the Human Rights of the United Nations, released a series of guidelines addressed to various nations, pushing governments to fix the most ugent emergencies about the status of information online. It took a decade for humans to implement the largest infrastructure of their history, and in the same amount of time the utopian visions about about the impact of the internet turned into dystopian ones. How that could happen?
A wide and interesting literature is focusing on the definition of the problems and their causes. Some of the most dangerous phenomena were mentioned in Barners-Lee words: bias, polarization, fake news. Several studies link this kind of phenomena to innate peculiarity of our cognitive mechanisms and to the design of our information and communication technologies, like Information Filtering systems and, in particular, Recommender Systems. If their role in the mentioned phenomena is still under debate, it is not debatable their crucial importance. Those system are the unavoidable passage for every content we experience through the internet. And if we consider that people are spending a quickly increasing amount of time on the internet, and for many of them it is becoming the primary source of news and information, with which they build their own representation of the reality, we easily realize that their role is becoming more and more important for the very foundation of our societies.
Literature is divided on the effects of Recommender Systems. One of the main points of controversy is the