Fighting the emergence of antibiotic resistance with evolutionary-proof drugs


The beginning of the 20th century marked the onset of the antibiotics era. 
This represented a full-fledged revolution for public health since common, fatal infections could suddenly be cured. This widespread enthusiasm, however, declined soon: as antibiotics became a common practice in medical settings, some bacterial species developed resistance mechanisms. 
Moreover, scientists discovered that bacteria can acquire resistance in multiple ways, some of which defy our understandings about Darwinian evolution.  
Indeed resistance genes may appear not only through spontaneous mutations but also thanks to physical exchange of genetic material (horizontal gene transfer). For example, carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella Pneumoniae can confer antibiotic resistance to Escherichia Coli, one of the most common residents of the gut flora, via plasmids.   


The dissemination of resistant bacteria in hospitals, where antibiotic consumption is high, is of particular concern for public health. 
Nowadays, hospitals are equipped with several lines of antimicrobials .
However, infections resilient even to last-line drugs have been recently reported.
It is now clear that an universal panacea does not exist; sooner or later, any antibiotics will become obsolete.
Also, the frequency at which new drugs are being developed is decreasing over time. 


Preventing the emergence of antibiotic resistant bacteria is thus of primary importance for mankind. There are several strategies that should be followed.
First of all, public health regulations need to become more tight with respect to treatment, by e.g. promoting preliminary screening and clinical tests and a rational use of antibiotics.
Also, as traditional antibiotics are losing their efficacy, we need new paradigmatic ways to fight bacterial infections.
For example, researchers have been recently investigating “evolutionary-proof” drugs. The rationale behind such drugs is to hit bacteria in such a way to delay the onset of resistance as much as possible, increasing thus drug longevity. 
There exist several ways in which these drugs may “fool” bacterial evolution.
First, impairing pathogens’ virulence instead of killing them, as traditional “evolutionary-fallible” drugs do, could reduce selective pressure on bacteria. 
Another strategy is to design drugs that act on the host environment, affecting the resources resistant pathogens are panicking for. There exists indeed compelling evidence that resistant strains require more resources than their susceptible counterparts. Therefore, by engineering a resource-limited within-host environment, resistant strains would likely be outcompeted by susceptible ones. 
The novelty of this approach is that it harnesses ecological interactions to get rid of resistant pathogens. The hope is that microbes will have a hard time to adapt to resource limitation.


In summary, therapies accounting not only for the evolutionary potential of the targeted species, but also the enclosing pathogen ecosystem, may constitute an invaluable tool to fight the emergence of resistance.