The interaction between pathogen strains and its effect on the population level spread of diseases is raising increasing attention nowadays. This is because such interactions have been found to have an effect on the spreading dynamics of infectious diseases and on the efficacy of interventions. Influenza subtypes, for instance, have a different impact on the population, thus their heterogeneous properties must be accounted for in the planning of interventions and design of vaccination. For bacterial infections such as pneumococco, phenotipic variations among strains may cause the failure of vaccination campaigns, when developed vaccines, targeting only one subset of strain cause strain replacement. Other examples, include the emergence of antibiotic resistant bacteria (e.g. A. aureus) and the multiple circulating strains in of Dengue that are known to alter the dynamics  of seasonal epidemics. 


The central question common to all these epidemiological situations is about the drivers of pathogen diversity, i.e. about the mechanisms determining the outcome of an emerging variant in terms of persistence/co-circulation/replacement. The challenge behind this question is due to the interplay between the different biological, environmental and population level factors at the play. 


The subject has gained a lot of attention within the theoretical ecology community where the interplay between strains epidemiological traits in determining co-existence/dominance has been extensively studied. Recently the framework of complex networks has provided the perfect ground for studying the role on strain dynamics of the complex connectivity of human population. Complex networks here represent host spatial structure or host social contacts. Several theoretical studies pointed out how the structure of the network affects strain interaction and emergence. 


The difficulty is due to the accounting of the many biological and population drivers of emergence. In particular population