The need for AI based interactive tools for music composition




Nowadays, artificial intelligence has opened exciting perspectives in various domains such as artistic creation. Indeed, we have now reached a point where machine learning models are able of producing realistic and touching work of art as shown by the example of The Next Rembrandt, a project led by Delft university aiming at creating a totally new painting in the style of the famous Dutch painter with the help of AI. While being increasingly used for visual art, music is still lacking that new technologic layer.


However, musicians and composers are not stranger to change since they came a long way from the tribal rhythms, gregorian chants or middle age musical stories. At that time, musical traditions were transmitted orally, which is not the case anymore since the development of theories on how to write music. These have been led the way for newer ways to compose, providing the ability to create more complex pieces while ensuring their reproducibility. To continue towards technical progresses in music, our generation has to address how to incorporate the new paradigm of machine learning into music creation.


For this purpose, research is being conducted on AI tools for music composition. Indeed, computers being logic machines deprived from feelings, they have the incredible ability to extract music theory as mathematical structures out of huge corpuses of existing pieces. Hence, some experienced composers might be questioning both the ethic and the relevance of such tools, which raises an important question: should AI-based tools be perceived as stealing the work of human composers.


A track for answering the first question is that currently developed tools for music composition are working in a similar fashion of human brain: they take advantage of the huge amount of available musical data to infer rules for music composition. Therefore, they are doing the exact same job as a composer that would analyze everything he listens to in order to find inspiration, but way faster given the computational power they dispose. That is why, at first glance, one could argue that using AI is cheating and it could lead to stealing the work of composers. However, this answer has to be completed with the answer to a second question: is AI able to generate “artistic” pieces.


In fact, art often does not consists in the final product only but also on the innovative approach one has adopted. Therefore, AI generating full musical pieces might not be considered as art anymore as soon as the novelty fades. Nevertheless, we can think of a more sustainable way to involve AI in music composition through interactivity. To keep AI as an assisting tool for music