Intro for paper on nosocomial risk




Healthcare associated infections (HAI) are increasingly widespread with an estimated 4 million individuals affected each year in Europe, representing approximately 6% of hospitalized patients [refs]. These infections have a substantial impact on morbidity and associated costs for the health-care system, potentially leading to failure of treatment, longer illnesses, and deaths. In addition, the rise of antimicrobial resistance in nosocomial pathogens have dramatically increased the threat posed by these infections, as they may be at the origin of serious infections that cannot be treated with available drugs [refs].  


Common bacterial pathogens generally spread through close-range proximity or physical contacts between individuals. Several studies highlighted the importance of interactions in the hospital setting, showing how a larger variety of contacts and longer durations are associated to an increase in the risk for nosocomial infection [refs]. More specifically, health-care workers were found to play a central role in HAI dissemination as they can get easily infected by patients and transmit the infection to a large number of contacts, acting as superspreaders in the hospital population [refs]. Among them, nurses were found to establish the largest number of contacts with distinct individuals, so they are often considered as potential vectors for HAI circulation because of the frequent and continuous contacts they establish with individuals of different categories (e.g. doctors and patients). 


Intervention strategies for infection control in the hospital therefore target nurses and aim at reducing the rate of transmission on each given contact. This can be achieved for example through vaccination, hygienic (hand washing, use of hydroalcoholic gels) or preventive measures (use of masks and gloves) [refs]. This type of control measures may however be limited by low compliance rates, as reported by several studies and especially under conditions of emergency or understaffing [refs]. Given the importance of contacts, other approaches have explored the possibility of altering the paths for potential HAI dissemination by removing contacts established by nurses [refs]. This approach may however not be feasible in that such contacts are critical to ensure the quality of care of patients treated in the hospital. 


Here we propose a proof-of-concept study for hospital infection control based on the reorganization of care in a hospital ward through changes in the schedule of nurses’ working shifts. Integrating high-resolution temporal data on contacts recorded between individuals in a hospital ward [ref], our approach builds on the exchange of individual nurses in performing their tasks by altering their working schedules, while maintaining full staff capacity at any given time and preserving all contacts recorded in the dataset. While removal of contacts may affect patients treatment, here we aim at optimizing the working schedules in such a way to reduce the risk of HAI circulation in the ward while complying with the treatment needs (i.e. the observed contacts) and respecting standard job regulations (e.g. weekly workload, length of a working shift, etc.). Our study is applied to a short-stay geriatric hospital ward in Lyon where contact data were collected through automated sensors and considers the circulation of common hand-transmitted bacteria such as Staphylococcus aureus and Enterococci.