Intro for paper on nosocomial risk




Healthcare associated infections (HAI) are increasingly widespread with an estimated 4 million individuals affected each year in Europe, representing approximately 6% of hospitalized patients [refs]. These infections have a substantial impact on morbidity and associated costs for the health-care system, potentially leading to failure of treatment, longer illnesses, and deaths. In addition, the rise of antimicrobial resistance in nosocomial pathogens have substantially increased the threat to human health, as resistant pathogens may be at the origin of serious infections that cannot be treated with available drugs [refs].  


Common nosocomial pathogens spread through close-range proximity or physical contacts between individuals. Several studies highlighted the importance of contacts for HAI diffusion, showing how larger variety and longer durations of contacts are associated to an increase in the risk for nosocomial infection [refs]. Health-care workers, and more specifically nurses, play a key role in pathogen dissemination because of their frequent and persistent contacts with many individuals of different categories, including patients and administrative personnel. They are central to health care in the hospital, but their occupation make them also at higher risk for HAI colonization. Once carrying the pathogen, nurses may act as superspreaders with the potential to spread the infection to the large number of individuals they get in contact with, especially in the vulnerable population of hospital patients [refs]. 


Main intervention strategies for hospital infection control thus target nurses and aim at reducing the per-contact risk of transmission. This can be achieved for example through vaccination, hygienic (hand washing, use of hydroalcoholic gels) or preventive measures (use of masks and gloves) [refs]. The efficacy of these measures is however limited by low compliance rates, as reported by several studies especially under conditions of emergency or understaffing [refs]. Even low compliance by few individuals only may have a disproportionate impact on the risk of pathogen diffusion in the hospital, given the large heterogeneity of individual contact behaviors and the presence of superspreaders [refs]. Other approaches for infection control have therefore explored the possibility of altering directly contact behaviors, for example through removal or rewiring of contacts established by nurses or through cohorting [refs]. These approaches may however be more difficult to implement in real contexts as contacts are critical to ensure the quality of care of patients treated in the hospital. 


Here we propose a proof-of-concept study for hospital infection control based on the reorganization of care in a hospital ward through changes in the schedule of working shifts of nurses. Integrating high-resolution temporal data on contacts recorded between individuals in a hospital ward [ref], our approach builds on the exchange of individual nurses in performing their tasks by altering their working schedules, while maintaining full staff capacity at any given time and preserving all contacts recorded in the dataset. While removal of contacts may affect patients treatment, here we aim at optimizing the working schedules in such a way to reduce the risk of HAI circulation in the ward while complying with the treatment needs (i.e. the observed contacts) and respecting standard job regulations (e.g. weekly workload, length of a working shift, etc.). Our study is applied to a short-stay geriatric hospital ward in Lyon where contact data were collected through automated sensors and considers the circulation of common hand-transmitted bacteria such as Staphylococcus aureus and Enterococci.