One of the biggest challenges humanity is facing nowadays is the speeding up of  the urbanization phenomenon. Despite the recent inversion of the trend in some areas of the world after the economic crisis, the vast majority of population for the first time in history now resides in cities. Different communities within science has started to tackle the problem of building a deep understanding of the phenomena related with urban environment, with the aim of building more sustainable and livable cities.
 
Recently, complex systems modelling allowed for the understanding of general laws governing the structure of cities at a macroscopic level. In particular, scaling laws with the population emerge when considering cities at the level of macroscopic socio-economic indicators. Remarkably, this phenomenon occurs disregarding the specific part of the world and the specific time frame. These simple laws have profound consequences in the way we think  about cities. Scaling-laws indicates similar properties at each scale, so that we can think smaller cities to be made of the same basic components of larger ones just occurring on a smaller scale. Such intriguing idea has been backed up in time by empirical observations as well as different modelling schemes, trying to grasp the microscopic mechanism making scalings emerge. 


This works aims at contributing to the development of a general modelling scheme to understand the dynamics of cities at this aggregate level of socio-economic indicators. Rather than focusing on the emergence of scalings, we will assume them as an intrinsic properties of urban systems. Using datasets from different European countries and different years, we devise an inference method capable of deriving the interactions between several indicators related to the economic state of a city.  Remarkably, we found that the inferred models are extremely similar, independently from the specific nation and time. Moreover, the models are predictive in the sense that are capable of predicting the evolution of a city through the years with a good accuracy.


The application of inference methods borrowed from Statistical Physics has a long standing history in Biology, where scaling laws are well-known phenomena. In biology, scaling laws are well-known consequences of the hierarchical organization of biological networks, leading to self-similarities across animal species of every size and to the scaling of characteristic biological times with the average size of specimens. Statistical Physics has contributed to the understanding of the phenomenon and other biological laws, allowing for the reconstruction of the interconnection patterns of amino acids in proteins and biological networks using inference methods. Hence, their application to the study of cities seem to be the natural evolution of the field in order to contribute to identify the inner and common structure of cities at all scales. And some interesting works have appeared in relatively recent times following this idea.


Starting from socio-economic indicators of cities of different sizes in France, UK and Italy we exploit their scaling laws with the population of the city to produce a sample of ``rescaled indicators’’, widely studied in the literature. This indicators allow for comparison of cities of different sizes, from small towns to large metropolis. Considering each city as represented by this set of indicators, we use a Maximum Entropy method to infer the model governing the way in which they interact with each other within the same city. The idea behind this modellization resembles the way in which couplings between particles or magnets are typically inferred in physical systems. We find that interactions leading to non-linear behaviors are needed to describe the data. Moreover, dividing the data by nation and by year produces models which are very much alike, i.e. where the couplings are consistent from one model to the other. This interesting result paves the way to a more general description of cities in terms on equilibrium systems or non-equilibrium stationary systems in the physical sense. Despite the evidence suggests a non-equilibrium dynamics rather than an equilibrium one, as to be expected for urban systems, assuming equilibrium allows to predict anyways the evolution of cities with a good precision.


These methods allows to define models based on a very limited number of assumptions all related to the direct observation of the data, with respect to other methods (e.g. Agent Based) requiring the formulation of many ``a priori’’ hypotheses that need to be backed up by ``a posteriori’’ checks with the data. Moreover, the results of these inference methods are successful independently from their number of components, their inner complexity and occasional scarcity of data making them even more appealing for the considered problems that might present all these issues.


Then we will study the more deep and low-level structure of the single components of each city, i.e. infrastructures, facilities and inhabitants to characterize the interactions between these ``microscopic’’ components. At these levels, data from different sources should be combined: both the localized data about facilities and activities, representing the functional units of cities to data concerning the way in which inhabitants move and interact with them, representing the backbone of the network of interactions between these elements. In this way, we aim at been able to explain diverse phenomena such as scaling, sprawling and disaggregation of settlements as well as the growth and decline of cities that are resulting from the interplay of these different actors.


The knowledge produced by this research will be useful to face the future challenges of urbanization, foreseeing future spontaneous changes as well as the consequences of development policies, such as the transition towards more ``green’’ cities, the elimination of spatial segregation and introduction of novel facilities.