Topic sentence structure


AI started a new gold rush. It is causing huge changes in industry, academia and in society. Companies rush to hire young deep-learning wizards. Universities restructure their courses to include all types of machine learning. Traditionally boring computer science conferences revamp themselves into dazzling shows of disruptive applications to societal challenges. 


It wasn’t always the case. The current AI renaissance follows decades of slow development and rides on the wave of the explosion of computing power and availability of large annotated datasets. These finally allowed neural networks to reach human-level performances in tasks, such as driving a car, planning a path through a crowded station and -importantly- recognize fluffy cats in photographs. 


At its roots, however, AI was about a far older and fundamental question: what is the origin of human intelligence? And, can we reconstruct it? This question inspired the first models of neural networks. ADD BITS ABOUT 1948, turing etc…
They were crudely modeled after the apparently incoherent network of neurons inside our heads and promised to provide a window into what made us able to learn, think, plan, live. 


Many years after their inception, some AI models are finally beginning to deliver on their promise. For example, a recent work demonstrated a direct correspondence between the hierarchy of the human visual areas layers of deep convolutional neural networks once they were trained on visual object recognition. Another work linked the activation in deep networks to sensory cortical processing. Even more interestingly, 
IMPROVE EXAMPLES


Surprisingly, AI models and the brain describe the world in very similar ways. This is very evident in how space is represented 


Both brains and machines seems to encode space and relations in similar ways.


This encoding is topological in nature and this is surprising…  because topology is very rarefied and arcane.


Other functions (memory, tasks) share similarities with spatial coding. 


Therefore, they are likely to be topologically encoded too. And this is huge.