Relevance of topology in neuroscience and deep learning 


Structure:
1. Focus on DL/ML
2. AI and neuroscience, an old liaison 
3. Benefits and relation to the understanding of how we understand the world 
4. Place cells, grid cells, and other encodings
5. Topology, the arcane math of shapes
6. Topology as an economical language to encode structure, shape
7. Future developments
8. ??




Artificial intelligence is the new gold. Companies rush to hire young talented deep learning wizards, while universities furiously restructure their teaching offer to include courses on any flavour of machine learning. Traditionally boring computer science conferences get revamped into dazzling shows of disruptive deep learning applications and newly found egos. 
It wasn’t always so. Indeed, the recent AI renaissance follows decades of disappointing winter, and comes in the wake of the explosion of computing (GPU mainly) power and wide availability of large annotated datasets, which finally allowed neural networks to reach human-level performances in tasks such as recognizing a fluffy cat in photographs, or planning our path through a crowded underground station. 
At its roots, however AI emerged from a far older and more delicate problem: what is human intelligence? And, can we reconstruct it? 
The most common approach to this question has been to try and understand how the human brain learns and adapts to the world outside it, which in turn meant trying to disentangle -both literally and figuratively- the apparently chaotic network of neurons inside our heads. Indeed, this was the original motivation for developing artificial neural networks. 
Today, the latter have finally reached the point where they can start shedding a light onto the internal happening  






Thanks to the 


At the heart of this question connections and their capacity to mimick the working of the human brain. 
 Already in 1948 Alan Turing theorized a type of machine “substantially unorganized”  
 artificial neural networks were in fact conceived as a




 


* AI and neuroscience. Lots of hype recently about the advances of artificial intelligence, its applications, its benefits and its risks. 
* Power/benefits etc. At the core of it all, there is the idea that the machines might one day emulate if not surpass our capacity to understand, plan and potentially change the world. 


* Emergence of At the same time, almost unseen, an arcane branch of mathematics started making its way into the arenas of machine learning, data science and -also- AI. 
* Topology and its successes
* What is topology? It is based on simple ideas o f