The human ability to anticipate the following short chunk of text when reading or listening at some phrases is a common tool implicitly used in daily life by everyone. It has been often shown in cognitive science experiences that the common reader actually reads only  a small part of the text - mainly the beginning and some relevant parts as desinences and suffixes - reconstructing in autonomous and unconscious fashion the missing ignored parts. The same mechansm allows human readers to be unaware of eventual orthogaphic mistakes just because of the changing attentional focus during the acquisition of a textual sequence. A simple example of such mechanism is clearly represented by the previous sentence, where some errors have been treacherously  inserted and not all the actual readers of the present paper could have been aware of this anomaly.
At this purpose, Rubedo is an installation game aimed at the evaluation of the human ability to anticipate the next character of a written text. The player is requested to read the initial chunk of text of a short novel and to guess letter by letter the continuation of the story. This process is repeated up to the end of the novel and the final reward for the player is twofold: first she earns the comprehension and the full fruition of the reading, and besides she evaluates the guessing performance according to a reference score defined later on.
The ability to predict the next character by a human reader can be related to several cognitive aspects of the local and global comprehension of the narrative under reading. A low level description considers the knowledge of the structure of words commonly used in a given language, so knowing the beginning of a word quickly reduces the tree of the following possibilities, leading to the choice of the correct next character. At a more abstract level, a human reader identifies the most likely next word or text chunk counting on a deeper comprehension of the meaning of the text and selecting the best context from which to extract the most appropriate word. This last example is particularly important at the beginning of a sentence where the textual information previously appeared in much less meaningful than in the middle of a phrase.
Such ability to anticipate the following character by a human player has been investigated by C. Shannon in the middle of the twentieth century as a paradigm of an efficient compressor of information. The typical example given by Shannon consists of two twins at both the ends of a transmission channel. The twin sending the message performs the same anticipation