The human ability to anticipate the following short chunk of text when reading or listening at some phrases is a common tool used by everyone in daily life. Experiments in cognitive science shown that the common reader actually reads only  a small part of the text - mainly the beginning and some relevant parts as desinences and suffixes - reconstructing in autonomous and unconscious way the missing ignored parts. This mechansm allows human readers to be unaware of eventual orthogaphic mistakes because of the changing attentional focus during the of a textual sequence. A simple example of such mechanism is clearly represented by the previous sentence, where there have been treacherously  inserted some errors and possibly not all the actual readers of the present paper have been aware of this anomaly.
For this purpose, Rubedo is an installation game aimed at the evaluation of the human ability to anticipate the next character of a written text. The player is asked to read the initial chunk of text of a short novel and to guess letter by letter the continuation of the story. This process is repeated up to the end of the novel and the final reward for the players is twofold: first they gain the comprehension and the full fruition of the reading, and besides they evaluate the guessing performance according to a reference score.
The ability to predict the next character by a human reader is related to several cognitive aspects about the local and global comprehension of the narrative under reading. The local comprehension considers the knowledge of the structure of words commonly used in a given language. This implies, for instance, that knowing the beginning of a word reduces the tree of the possible next character, easily leading to the identification of the more likely subset of letter. At a more abstract level, a human reader identifies the most likely next word or text chunk basing on a deeper comprehension of the meaning of the text and selecting the best context from which to extract the most appropriate word. This last example is particularly important at the beginning of a sentence where the textual information previously appeared in much less meaningful than in the middle of a phrase.
Claude Shannon in the middle of the twentieth century investigated the ability to anticipate the next character by a human player as a paradigm of an efficient compressor of information. The experiment proposed by Shannon consists of two twins at both the ends of a transmission channel. The twin A sending the message performs the same anticipation process as described above, attempting to predict the next character from the very beginning and annotating how many attempts have been required for every letter in the message. The resulting coding makes use of a numerical sequence describing the number of attempts per letter, where the best cases are represented by 1 - the sender guessed the right letter at the first attempt - and the cases labelled with a number greater than 1 represent the multi-attempt case. Shannon conceived a compressor technique based on the human ability to efficiently guess the next character. In this technique, the sender transfers the characters labelled with a number greater than one, and a blank jolly character for the correctly guessed letters. The other twin B receives such a coded message and, assuming that his mental processes are perfectly identical to those of A, the blank character can be guessed correctly  with probability one. Such an elaboration of the compression system led to the definition of a upper and a lower bound for the information entropy related to the language used in the anticipation game. Shannon shown that entropy estimation bounds are only based on the distribution of the number of attempts performed by the human player.
In light of the above, Rubedo is more than a simple installation to make people playing. It is strictly  related to the information theory and, in particular, to the estimation of the entropy of a temporal informative signal. The hypothesis introduced by Shannon in his paper concerns the estimation of the entropy after a sufficiently long sequence of characters: the experiments he conducted with the collaboration of some players shown that humans are potentially able to perform the anticipation process in a very efficient fashion, leading to an entropy upper bound of about 1 bit per character.
Rubedo is then also accompanied by an artificial intelligence system based on recurrent neural networks which performs the same task as humans. AI and humans performance is recorded in terms of amount of attempts that allows to define a rewarding score for any single attempt and the final entropy upper bound estimation. At present the data gathering coming from human players performing the Rubedo game is still in progress, but the preliminary results are giving several interesting insights about the overall efficiency of the implemented artificial guessing system and, more in general, the limits of the present neural architectures.