Intro for paper on nosocomial risk


Healthcare associated infections (HAI) are increasingly widespread. An estimated 4 million individuals is affected each year in Europe, representing approximately 6% of hospitalized patients [refs]. These infections have a substantial impact on morbidity and associated costs for the health-care system, potentially leading to failure of treatment, longer illnesses, and deaths. In addition, the rise of antimicrobial resistance in nosocomial pathogens have substantially increased the threat to human health, as resistant pathogens may be at the origin of serious infections that cannot be treated with available drugs [refs].  


Common nosocomial pathogens spread through close-range proximity or physical contacts between individuals. Several studies highlighted the importance of contacts for HAI diffusion, showing how larger variety and longer durations of contacts are associated to an increase in the risk for nosocomial infection [refs]. Health-care workers, and more specifically nurses, play a key role in pathogen dissemination because of their frequent and persistent contacts with many individuals of different categories, including patients and administrative personnel. They are central to health care in the hospital, but their occupation make them also at higher risk for HAI colonization. Once carrying the pathogen, nurses may act as superspreaders with the potential to spread the infection to the large number of individuals they get in contact with, especially in the vulnerable population of hospital patients [refs]. 


Nurses are often the target group of intervention strategies for hospital infection control. These strategies aim at reducing the per-contact risk of transmission through, for example, vaccination, or the adoption of hygienic (hand washing, use of hydroalcoholic gels) or other preventive measures (use of masks and gloves) [refs]. The efficacy of these measures is however limited by low compliance rates, as reported by several studies especially under conditions of emergency or understaffing [refs]. Even low compliance by only few individuals may have a disproportionate impact on the risk of HAI diffusion in the hospital, given the large heterogeneity of individual contact behaviors and the presence of superspreaders [refs]. Other approaches for infection control have therefore explored the possibility of altering directly contact behaviors, for example restricting the interactions between healthcare workers and their visits to different rooms or through cohorting [refs]. These approaches may however be more difficult to implement or unfeasible in real contexts as nurse contacts are critical to ensure the quality of care of patients treated in the hospital. 


Here we propose a proof-of-concept study for hospital infection control based on the reorganization of care in a hospital ward through changes in the schedule of working shifts of nurses. Using high-resolution temporal records on contacts in a hospital ward [ref], our approach synthetically swaps working shifts between pairs of nurses. This results into altering nurses’ schedule of work and exchanging the tasks they perform in these shifts, represented by the pattern of contacts they establish in that timeframe. The aim of the approach is to find an appropriate reorganization of nurse scheduling through shift swapping that allows hospital administrators to considerably reduce the risk of HAI circulation in the ward. The reorganized schedule maintains full staff capacity at any given time, preserves all contacts recorded in the dataset without affecting quality standards of medical services, and respects standard job regulations (e.g. weekly workload, length of a working shift, etc.). The study is applied to a short-stay geriatric hospital ward in Lyon, France, where contact data were collected through automated sensors. Modeling the spreading dynamics of common hand-transmitted bacteria such as Staphylococcus aureus and Enterococci, we show that acting on nurse scheduling is more efficient than restricting their contacts for risk prevention. This shows the potential of reorganization of current scheduling practices for the implementation of successful infection control programs at hospitals.