Since its first definition, the concept of care pathway has provoked a great interest worldwide, especially in France. This notion aims at defining the successive use of the right care resources for each patient at the best time. Usually defined for a given disease, especially a chronic one, this concept mostly remains theoretical and must be based on data issued from observational studies. However, there is still no clearly definite care pathway for some diseases, such as multiple sclerosis (MS) even if around 100,000 persons are affected by this disease in France. Therefore, there is currently a need for the development of studies in France on this specific subject to increase knowledge on care pathways of persons with MS (PwMS) and allow for the definition of recommendations.


Firstly, care pathways are useful in order to have a better characterization of the use of care resources by PwMS. Indeed, several healthcare professionals (medical and paramedical) are involved in MS care and may act altogether in order to provide the best care. This coordination of professionals is also important in order to offer the patient the opportunity to be part of a clinical trial or to access treatments.
This characterization will also serve to identify needs of this specific population, especially unmet needs. Related to these unmet needs, this description may offer the opportunity to target specific research questions and thus show how research can directly answer to patients’ needs. 


The development of a care pathway for MS may also limit the occurrence of adverse events which may be linked to treatments. Indeed, most of the time these events could be prevent by seeing the right specialist before starting a therapy or by seeing regularly a general practitioner for example.
These adverse events have also a direct impact on the quality of life of PwMS, which is often already lower than in general population. It has even been shown that when achieving a high level of disability, people consider their life is even worse than death itself.


Another aspect related to the definition of care pathways is the economical point of view. Indeed, cost of MS in France represented more than 1.3 billion euros in 2015, which corresponds to around 11,900 euros per patient. As suggested before, defining care recommendations will permit to reduce adverse events and optimize care consumption which may lead at the end to a lower use of care resources and thus to an economical benefit for French health insurances.


Studying care consumption means to have access to such data for a given population. The recent opening of administrative data, i.e. databases gathering all reimbursements data collected by French health insurances, to researchers offers the opportunity to access accurately care consumption of the whole population of PwMS in France. These data thus permit to describe at the national level care pathways which may be grouped to identify a typology of care consumption and may help for the definition of such care pathways.