Usefulness of defining recommended care pathways in France: the example of multiple sclerosis


Since its first introduction in 1985, the concept of care pathway has provoked a great interest in France. This notion is defined by the successive use of care resources (consultations, hospital admissions, etc.) of each patient. In France, recommended pathways are defined by health authorities for chronic diseases to enhance care management and optimize resources. The aim of such pathways is to propose the use for a patient of the right care resources at the best time. Nowadays, there is still no recommended care pathway for some diseases. Multiple sclerosis (MS), affecting around 100,000 persons in France, is one of these. The definition of a recommended care pathway for MS would have a direct impact on care and quality of life of persons with MS (PwMS). Moreover, it would permit to save money.


Care pathways are useful to better coordinate the use of care resources by PwMS. Indeed, several medical and paramedical professionals are involved in MS care. These healthcare specialists need to collaborate altogether to provide the most appropriate care at each stage of the disease. This coordination may allow them to have a better understanding of patients’ disease and to offer them the opportunity to be part of a clinical trial or to access adapted therapies.


The development of a recommended care pathway for MS may have a direct impact on the quality of life of PwMS, which is often already lower than in general population. It may limit the occurrence of adverse events or avoidable readmissions. The latter are often the consequences of treatments or a lack of medical follow-up. However, these situations could mostly be prevent by a proximity follow-up from nurses and pharmacists of treatment adherence and by regular consultations with general practitioners, respectively.
The characterization of care pathways permits to target new specific research questions in health services research. Actually, the study of rupture and variations in pathways may raise questions on care cancelling or disability worsening. It may also highlight unmet needs of this specific population, which deserve consideration.


Another aspect is on the economical point of view. Cost of MS in France represented more than 1.3 billion euros in 2015, corresponding to around 11,900 euros per patient. As suggested before, defining care recommendations will permit to reduce adverse events and optimize care consumption which may lead at the end to a lower use of care resources and thus to an economical benefit for French health insurances.


Recommendations must rely on real-world data issued from observational studies. It therefore requires access to care consumption data for the population of interest. Administrative data, i.e. databases gathering all reimbursements data collected by French health insurances, may be a great opportunity. These data are now open to researchers and permit to access the exhaustive care-seeking of the whole population of PwMS in France. They allow to describe at national-level these pathways which may be grouped to build a typology of care consumption. The latter may then help for the definition of recommendations.