Usefulness of defining recommendations for care pathways in France: the example of multiple sclerosis


Since its first introduction in 1985, the concept of care pathway has gained a growing interest in France. Its practical definition is the succession of acts of care (consultations, hospital admissions, etc.) for a given patient. In France, health authorities are in charge of the formulation of these recommended pathways for chronic diseases to enhance care management and optimize resources. The aim of such recommendations is to propose the use of the right care resources at the best time depending on patient’s disease stage. French health authorities have not yet defined a care pathway for multiple sclerosis (MS) in France. Such a definition would have a direct impact on care and quality of life of persons with MS (PwMS) in addition to the economic repercussion for French health insurances.


Care pathways are useful to better plan and forecast the use of care resources by PwMS. The coordination of both medical and paramedical specialists involved in MS care permits to provide the most appropriate care at each stage of the disease. It also allows them to have a better understanding of patients’ disease and to offer these patients opportunities, such as clinical trials or access to adapted therapies.


The development of a recommended care pathway for MS may have a direct impact on the quality of life of PwMS, which is often already lower than in general population. It may limit the occurrence of adverse events or avoidable readmissions. The latter are often the consequences of treatments or a lack of medical follow-up. However, these situations could easily be prevented by a proximity follow-up of treatment adherence thanks to nurses and pharmacists and by regular consultations with general practitioners, respectively. Moreover, these events may raise questions of unmet needs of this specific population, due to care cancelling or disability worsening. Their identification would offer the opportunity to target new specific research questions in health services research, which deserve consideration. 


However, recommendations must rely on real-world data issued from observational studies. It thus requires access to care consumption data for the population of interest. Administrative data, i.e. databases gathering all reimbursements data collected by French health insurances, may be a great opportunity. These data are now open to researchers and permit to access the exhaustive care-seeking of the whole population of PwMS in France. They allow to describe care pathways at the national-level that may be grouped to build a typology of care consumption. The latter may then serve as a basis for the definition of recommendations.


Finally, the bigger impact of recommendations on care pathways may be the reduction the economic burden of MS. Cost of MS in France represented more than 1.3 billion euros in 2015, corresponding to around 11,900 euros per patient. As suggested before, defining care recommendations will permit to reduce adverse events and optimize care consumption. These changes will contribute to a more rationalized use of care resources leading at the end to a monetary benefit.