Chopping Down the Syntax Tree 
(version 3)


Noam Chomsky revolutionized the field of linguistics in the 1950s, but is now facing to be dethroned himself. In the Chomskyan view, the human language faculty is an autonomous, genetically encoded “perfect system” that interfaces with other mental modules (Chomsky 1995). In the past few decades, however, a new approach has emerged that rejects this modular approach and that treats language as an integral part of cognition and social interaction.


The grammatical theory that embodies this counter-movement the most is called construction grammar. Construction grammars exist in different flavors, but they share the idea that all linguistic information can be represented using a single data structure: constructions. Unfortunately, construction grammarians have been reluctant to offer a precise definition of what a construction is. Instead, they informally describe their most important data structure as “any mapping between meaning and form”. This lack of formal rigour invites linguists to recycle the formal tools that were developed within mainstream linguistics, or even to abandon formalization completely. It also means that Chomskyan linguistics can still safely defend their grip on the field.


Recent developments in computational linguistics, however, have provided construction grammarians with a methodological axe for finally chopping down the tree structures that occupy a central position in Chomskyan linguistics.


Construction grammarians feel that tree structures are not adequate representation devices for their linguistic analyses. Perhaps this is because they are too young to remember the days before the Chomskyan revolution, so they have grown up knowing only the mathematically well-defined tree structures of mainstream linguistics. While there is some variation among theories, the core primitives of those tree structures are that (a) all local tree configurations consist of a single parent node and its immediate children, and that (b) syntactic constituents are continuous.


However, the syntax trees of mainstream linguistics are to tree diagrams


all other kinds of information can be “read off” the structural relations of the syntax tree.


with the mathematically well-defined tree structures of mainstream linguistics. 


, so they have grown up taking for granted the mathematically well-defined tree structures of mainstream linguistics. 


a particular kind of tree structure for granted. 


Perhaps most construction grammarians avoid tree structures because they are too young to remember the days before the Chomskyan revolution. 












In order to propose a computationally precise definition of a construction, it is useful to first examine why the formal tools of mainstream linguistics are inadequate for constructional analyses.