One of the biggest challenges humanity is facing nowadays is the speeding up of  the urbanization phenomenon. Despite the recent inversion of the trend in some areas of the world after the economic crisis, the vast majority of population for the first time in history now resides in cities. Different communities within science has started to tackle the problem of building a deep understanding of the phenomena related with urban environment, with the aim of building more sustainable and liveable cities. 


In relatively recent years, complex systems modelling allowed for the understanding of general laws governing the structure of cities at a microscopic level. It has been shown, that when considering cities at an aggregated level, i.e. the level of macroscopic socio-economic indicators, scaling-laws emerge. In other words, each socio-economic indicator scales with a power of the population and this phenomenon occurs disregarding the specific part of the world and the specific.


These simple laws has profound consequences in the way we think cities. Scaling-laws indicates similar properties at each scale, so that we can think smaller cities to be made of the same basic components of larger one occurring on a different scale. Such intriguing idea has been backed up in time by empirical observations as well as different modelling schemes, trying to grasp the microscopic mechanism making scalings emerge. 


Moreover, the emergence of this scaling laws opens other interesting parallels with biology. Scaling laws are in fact well-known consequences of the hierarchical organization of biological networks, leading to self-similarities across animal species of every size and hence to the scaling of characteristic biological times with the average size of specimens. 


The identification of laws governing the biological processes has been successfully performed in biological systems by means of inference schemes borrowed from Statistical Mechanics, allowing for the reconstruction of the interconnection patterns of amino acids in proteins and other examples [...]. In this context the application of these schemes to the study of cities, seem to be the natural evolution of former studies related to the emergence of scaling laws.