One of the biggest challenges humanity is facing nowadays is the speeding up of  the urbanization phenomenon. Despite the recent inversion of the trend in some areas of the world after the economic crisis, the vast majority of population for the first time in history now resides in cities. Different communities within science has started to tackle the problem of building a deep understanding of the phenomena related with urban environment, with the aim of building more sustainable and livable cities.
 
Recently, complex systems modelling allowed for the understanding of general laws governing the structure of cities at a microscopic level. In particular, scaling laws with the population emerge when considering cities at the level of macroscopic socio-economic indicators. Remarkably, this phenomenon occurs disregarding the specific part of the world and the specific time frame. These simple laws have profound consequences in the way we think cities. Scaling-laws indicates similar properties at each scale, so that we can think smaller cities to be made of the same basic components of larger one occurring on a different scale. Such intriguing idea has been backed up in time by empirical observations as well as different modelling schemes, trying to grasp the microscopic mechanism making scalings emerge. 


The emergence of this scaling laws opens other interesting parallels with biology, that might be more than just conceptual suggesting a common methodological framework of  investigation.
Scaling laws are well-known consequences of the hierarchical organization of biological networks, leading to self-similarities across animal species of every size and to the scaling of characteristic biological times with the average size of specimens. Statistical Physics has contributed to the understanding of the phenomenon and other biological laws, allowing for the reconstruction of the interconnection patterns of amino acids in proteins and biological networks using inference methods. Moreover, the results of these inference methods are successful independently from their number of components, their inner complexity and occasional scarcity of data. Hence, their application to the study of cities seem to be the natural evolution of former studies related to the emergence of scaling laws and to the identification of the inner and common structure of cities at all scales. 


My research program aims at the exploration and development of specific inference methods, borrowed from both Statistical Physics and Machine Learning in order to unveil these common structures. These methods allows to define models based on a very limited number of assumptions all related to the direct observation of the data. 


Thus, it minimizes the amount of a priori speculations needing to be backed up a posteriori with specific experiments (maybe not needed). 




The road map for the definition of this theory should include the analysis of different kinds of data: from microscopic data concerning the way in which inhabitants move and interact within the city, representing the backbone of the interacting network, as well localized data of activities, facilities and public services constituting the ``bricks’’ of the city, its different functional units.


The ideal roadmap that my research intend to take and that has been partly been taken by other interesting and recent works on the edge between Statistical Physics and the more recent Science of City, is to start by developing models at a high level of aggregation capable of explaining and forecasting with a high degree of precision the evolution of urban environments and then moving into the more deep and microscopic structure, with the long-term aim of explaining within the same framework diverse phenomena as scaling, sprawling and disaggregation of settlements as well as collapse and decline of some cities.


The knowledge produced by this research will be, in my opinion, useful in order to face the future challenges of urbanization, foreseeing either future spontaneous changes as well as the consequences of development policies, such as the transition towards more ``green’’ cities, the elimination of spatial segregation and introduction of novel economic elements.