Recommender systems are ubiquitous in our  everyday experience. We get books recommended, music recommended, food recommended, items to buy, hotels, trips. Even opinions and ideas. Recommendations are so entangled in our experience that perhaps we cannot even conceive our life without them. Still we base most of our decisions on the suggestions or tips we receive or seek for. 


Like compasses in complex conceptual spaces, recommender systems exploit the knowledge about user behaviours and about the structure of the conceptual space itself, to suggest new directions to take, new experiences. Recommendations typically concern something we may like because it is similar to something we liked in the past or it is similar to something liked by someone else with a personal history similar to ours. The notion of similarity is key here. Two users can be similar if they went through similar experiences and two items can be similar because they share some structural, functional or semantic features. Two items can also be similar also if they co-occurred in the experiences of several users. This idea is brilliantly in place in almost all recommender systems with little variations taking into account personal histories, historical dependences, etc. And it turns out to be also very effective in many sectors where the abundance of data about people choices allows for a very precise profiling of people and items. But all that glitters is not gold!


Recommendations tend to confine us in a personal comfort zone, circularly defined as the set of items we tend to perceive as close to our taste or sensibility. They hardly suggest to us to explore something radically new. If this seems desirable in a marketing environment to fidelise customers, the potential drawbacks is to reduce our open-mindedness, preventing us from experiencing more diversity and possibly conflicting views. 


The extraordinary pervasiveness and efficiency achieved by current recommender systems calls for a deeper understanding of the deep mechanisms behind recommendation and a global rethinking of the way in which recommenders should accompany us in our everyday experience. 


Recommendation is closely related to the way in which we experience the new. And the experience of the new is something very common in our lives, either at a personal level (for instance the discovery of a new book) or at the global level (for instance when we write a new book). In both cases the experience of the new can be pictured as a path in a very special space, the space of the possible, the space of the possibilities, the space of what could be. Francois Jacob would distinguish this space of the “possible” from the space of the “actual”. Actual is the set of things we experienced already. Possible is the set of things we might possibly experience in the future. 


Stuart Kauffman proposed a very effective metaphor for the interplay between the actual and the possible: the so-called adjacent possible. The adjacent possible is loosely defined as the set of all those things - could be molecules, organisms, technological products, ideas - that are one step away from what actually exists, and can be achieved through an incremental recombination of the existing material. The key feature of the adjacent possible space is that its structure is not predefined - Kauffman would say unprestatable -; it gets instead constantly reshaped by the exploration of the space itself. Somehow each of us carves his own adjacent possible space while experiencing the new. 


The notion of adjacent possible is very relevant to grasp the deep nature of innovation processes. What we propose in this paper is that it might be suitable to define a new generation of recommender systems able to nudge us in a path of discovery of the new that progressively dislodges us from our comfort zone. The guiding idea will be that of recommending to each individual items “slightly” off with respect to his or her comfort zone, still preserving the pleasantness of the experience. This could allow us to progressively enlarge our comfort zone and have a more diverse, possibly balanced, experience of the new. This would contribute to change the balance between exploration (i.e., jumping to a radically new experience) and exploitation (i.e., confined remaining in our comfort zone). 




******










Recommender systems also have drawbacks. The main one can be dubbed the “tragedy of exploit/explore”. In suggesting us future experiences similar to those we had already or we may possibly like learning from others’ experiences, these systems are nudging us to go through similar experiences, though every time slightly different. They push us to “exploit”. The constant exposure to recommendations is progressively creating what we could name a “comfort zone”, an area, in the space of items or experiences, where we feel at ease. Any suggestions lying in this area  coming from a recommender system would be likely well-perceived. On the other had anything outside this area is very likely to be disregarded or even perceived as uncomfortable. This implies a strong reduction of our ability to “explore”, i.e., experience radically new things. If this is positive for a company that aims at fidelising its customers, it can have serious drawbacks if one things about news and opinions, because the comfort zone here can represent a system of prejudices, preventing us from a clear reading of the reality, reducing in fact our level of awareness. This is well-know confirmation bias that is held to be responsible  for the birth and evolution of the echo-chambers. So one important question is whether is possible to overcome the limitations of current recommender systems, conceiving instead a new generation of recommender systems able to shift the ration exploit/explore.


The notion of exploration is closely linked to that of “new”. It is new anything that we experience for the first time, either at a personal level (for instance a new book we are about to read) or at a collective level (for instance a book we just wrote). The question of the exploration of the new is a fascinating one that puzzled generations of scholars. How can we conceive and define the space where novelties can be experienced? How can one estimate the probability for a new event to occur? A very interesting hypothesis in this area has been proposed by Stuart Kauffman, who introduced the the notion of Adjacent Possible. Adjacent Possible is loosely defined as the set of things - could be molecules, organisms, technological products, ideas, etc. - that are one step away from what actually exists and that could be reached by the incremental recombination of existing elements. This hypothesis is exploiting the dichotomy actual/possible mentioned for instance by Francois Jacob. Actual is what we experincesìd already, while possible is the set of experiences we…..