Recommender systems are ubiquitous in our  everyday experience. We receive recommendations about new books, new songs, new items to buy, hotels, restaurant, trips. Even opinions and ideas. Recommendations are so entangled in our experience that perhaps we cannot even conceive our life without them. Still we base most of our decisions on the suggestions or tips we receive or seek for. 


Recommendations typically concern something we may like because it is similar to something we liked in our past experience or it is similar to something liked by someone else with a personal history similar to ours. Either way, recommendations tend to confine us in a sort of comfort zone, circularly defined as the set of items we tend to perceive as close to our taste or sensibility. They hardly suggest to us to explore something radically new. If this seems desirable in a marketing environment to fidelise the customers, the potential drawbacks is to reduce our open-mindedness, preventing us from experiencing more diversity and possibly conflicting views. 


The extraordinary pervasiveness and efficiency achieved by current recommender systems calls for a deeper understanding of the deep mechanisms behind recommendation and a global rethinking of the way in which recommenders should accompany us in our everyday experience. 


Recommendation is closely related to the way in which we experience the new. And the experience of the new is something very common in our lives, either at a personal level (for instance the discovery of a new book) or at the global level (for instance when we write a new book). In both cases the experience of the new can be pictured as a path in a very special space, the space of the possible, the space of the possibilities, the space of what could be. Francois Jacob would distinguish this space of the “possible” from the space of the “actual”. Actual is the set of things we experienced already. Possible is the set of things we might possibly experience in the future. 


Stuart Kauffman proposed a very effective metaphor for the interplay between the actual and the possible: the so-called adjacent possible. The adjacent possible is loosely defined as the set of all those things - could be molecules, organisms, technological products, ideas - that are one step away from what actually exists, and can be achieved through an incremental recombination of the existing material. The key feature of the adjacent possible space is that its structure is not predefined - Kauffman would say …. -; it gets instead constantly reshaped by the exploration of the space itself. Somehow each of us carves his own adjacent possible space while experiencing the new. 


The notion of adjacent possible is very relevant to grasp the deep nature of innovation processes. What we propose in this paper is that it might