Fighting the emergence of antibiotic resistance


The beginning of the 20th century marked the onset of the antibiotics era. 
This represented a full-fledged revolution as common, fatal infections could suddenly be cured, reducing the overall public health burden.
However, not a long time after the first drugs appeared, a new menace arose: as antibiotics became a common practice in medical settings, some bacterial species developed resistance mechanisms. 
Furthermore, several bacteria appear to acquire resistance genes not only through mutations but also thanks to physical exchange of genetic material (horizontal gene transfer). For example carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella Pneumoniae can confer antibiotic resistance to Escherichia Coli, one of the most common residents of the gut flora, via plasmids.   


The dissemination of resistant bacteria in hospitals, where antibiotic consumption is high, is of particular concern for public health. 
Nowadays, most hospitals stock several lines of antibiotics to face resistant infections.
However, infections resilient even to last-line drugs have been recently reported.
It is now clear that an universal panacea does not exist and that, sooner or later, any antibiotics will become obsolete.
Also, the frequency at which new drugs are being developed and distributed to the large public is decreasing. 


Preventing the emergence of antibiotic resistant bacteria is thus of primary importance for mankind. There are several strategies that should be followed.
First of all, public health regulations need to become more tight with respect to treatment by e.g. promoting pre-emptive screening and clinical tests and a rational use of antibiotics.
Also, as traditional antibiotics are losing their efficacy, we need new paradigmatic ways to fight bacterial infections.
For example, researchers have been recently investigating “evolutionary-proof” drugs, whose aim is to fool bacterial evolution by maximally delaying the onset of resistance in bacterial populations. 
The problem with conventional antibiotics is that they increase selective pressure on bacteria, prompting selection of those genetic traits which are responsible for resistance.