Fighting the emergence of antibiotic resistance


The beginning of the 20th century marked the onset of the antibiotics era. 
This represented a full-fledged revolution as common, fatal infections could then be cured, reducing the overall public health burden.
However, not a long time after the first drugs appeared, a new menace arose: as antibiotics became a common practice in medical settings, some bacterial species developed resistance mechanisms. 
Furthermore, several bacteria appear to acquire resistance genes not only through mutations but also thanks to physical exchange of genetic material (horizontal gene transfer). For example carbapenem-resistant Klebsiella Pneumoniae can confer antibiotic resistance to Escherichia Coli, one of the most common residents of the gut flora, via plasmids.   


The dissemination of resistant bacteria in hospitals, where antibiotic consumption is high, is of particular concern for public health. 
Nowadays, most hospitals stock several lines of antibiotics to face resistant infections.
However, infections resilient even to last-line drugs have been recently reported.
It is now clear that an universal panacea does not exist and that, sooner or later, any antibiotics will become obsolete.
Also, the frequency at which new drugs are being developed and distributed to the large public is decreasing. 


Avoiding a fallback. Public health regulations need to become more tight in this respect by e.g. preventing excessive usage of large-spectrum antibiotics and favoring pre-emptive screening and clinical tests.


Also, we need new paradigmatic ways to fight bacterial infections.
For example researchers have been recently looking  at “evolutionary-proof” drugs, whose aim is to fool bacterial evolution by maximally delaying the onset of resistance in bacterial populations. 
The problem with conventional antibiotics is that they increase selective pressure on bacteria, prompting selection of those genetic traits which are responsible for resistance.