Compose different


Recent research in AI-assisted music tools is opening new exciting horizons for art creation. For example, a computer is able, on the one hand, to extract features from a sound and to learn notions such as structure, genre or even rhythm by learning on huge corpuses of existing sound pieces.  Such systems are already widespread in companies for music analysis tasks such as mood detection, lyrics and melody transcription and many others. Therefore, some music supervision companies are now shelving their expertise in music listening to rely on such tools to help them categorize sounds.


Generation with AI


On the other hand, similar systems are also used to model music sequences and to generate new ones using a corpus to learn harmony, chord progressions or timbre. However, unlike the former application, the perspective of using AI based assistants for melodic composition can still be perceived as cheating or stealing by old school composers with a strong musical background. Indeed, we AI scientists actually use machines to extract the essence of music from a huge collection of existing material they composed. But it is exactly what the human brain does, isn’t it? 


Moreover, if we do a parallel with audio, sound designers should be as angry at AI since we are now able to generate timbral innovations 




The importance of making interactive tools


        A common claim is that these stealing machines will never be close to artists because of their intrinsic logic behaviour but this should actually not be the goal of research in AI for music: since music composition is a fun process in itself, we want to keep human in the center of it and to welcome more and more new composers, we claim that the association of a human disruptive brain and a fast logic machine can yield incredible artistic results. Towards this goal, we think that the AI community should focus on developing interactive










Composing music is a constantly evolving process. Indeed, from tribal percussions and rhythms to electronic dance music, composers have came a long way.