Robotics is envisioned as a revolution for the coming years impacting work conditions as well as our daily life. It is also announced as a major factor in bringing a new green revolution to the agriculture sector in a similar fashion to the first green revolution of the 60s which built on the advances of the chemical industry and on the mechanization Some argue that such technology will be much needed for facing the challenge of feeding 9 billion people by 2050. It is also an answer to the challenges faced by farmers in finding workers for some of the tasks of agriculture which are time consuming and painful. Recent years have seen the emergence of robots dedicated to various tasks in agriculture. Often, these are big machines as working in fields require a robust setup and high power and they are dedicated to a single culture. The agroequipment sector have to make few adjustments to get their traditional machines autonomous but it is a continuation of the technology they used to produce.


A different approach to the problem departing from the traditional agroequipment industry has emerged recently with projects focusing on lightweight platforms with modular architecture. These are interesting as they bring new concepts and could provide the basis of a much more radical change in agricultural practices. At first sight, having small robots may not seem efficient to cover the wide areas of today’s farmers but some projects propose to combine several of these robots working in cooperation. More importantly, a small robot is of great interest for microfarms which are a much overlooked sector of agriculture regarding to technology. UN and various other organizations emphasized the role small farms may have for the development of a sustainable agriculture. There is a growing trend, at least in Europe, of young people settling on small farms pursuing an agriculture respectful of the environment while being keen to adopting new technologies. 


There are with multiple drawbacks to using big machines. The maintenance on these machine is very difficult. Moreover, due to their weight, they have a huge impact on soil compaction reducing the fertility of the soil. Big machines have made their time and are often oversized for the task at hand, especially in microfarms. The powerful tractors found in today’s farms have a life expectancy that is much greater than their owners who often don’t need such power. The run for more powerful and heavy machines should be redirected to a development of modular and intelligent platforms.


The modularity of new robots is a great shift from traditional machines which specialized machines traditionally used in agriculture. Farmers have the know-how to repair and customize the platforms and it should be encouraged. Moreover, a robot that is easily reconfigurable result in a lower cost compared to the investment in multiple machines each having a specific purpose.


The shift to intelligent machines is a challenging one in environmental conditions full of uncertainties such as encountered in agriculture. Various sensors may be used for controlling the robot and its navigation. A first option is to rely on very precise GPS signals and to control the motors so that it is following a trajectory. A very precise GPS comes at a high cost and the reliability of the signal may be low depend on the weather conditions or if the robot is in a greenhouse. A possible solution is to complement a cheap GPS with additional sensors like 3d sensors (Lidar), stereo-cameras, inertial measurement unit (IMU) and wheel encoders to build a much more robust navigation system. This requires careful fusion of the signals for positioning. Small robots may also have an advantage over systematic mode of operation of traditional machines in that they can map the field and bring detailed information to the farmers. These informations may then be used to have targeted interventions. The mapping of properties of the plant may help detect plant stress or heterogeneity in the soil for example using multispectral cameras. These informations are extremely useful for farmers. Another area where intelligent robot are useful is the precise weeding of  crops. Equipped with a camera and maybe a lighting system, the robot takes pictures of its workspace. Detection of weeds and crops may be performed using modern deep learning techniques or handcrafted features. A precise spraying or mechanical weeding technique may then be used to reach a clean culture bed. 


The evaluation of these tools is crucial for getting the farmers’ interest. It should also be discussed with them how the introduction of robots in fields will affect their farming practices. There are also issues related to the reliability of artificial intelligence in uncertain environments such as fields.