Creativity and innovation dynamics to model modern socio-technical systems.

Since the start of the digital revolution the majority of human activities have been digital recorded so that they can be traced and reconstructed at an unprecedented level of detail. Despite this wealth of data, the modelling of processes such as online social networks evolution or the human mobility at the local and global scale remain a challenging task. This is due to the many hidden interplaying mechanisms that shape the evolution of such systems at different scales: the mobility pattern of a citizen is indeed shaped by many factors (his workday schedule, unexpected events and so on) just like our social contacts may suddenly change when meeting a new person or because of an abrupt change in our daily routines.

Tough difficult, the study of such systems is of utmost importance because of the need to anticipate their behavior under perturbations and to design effective policies to check their status.  For example, a city council may be interested in designing new mobility strategies so that a robust prediction on how a given decision may affect the urban landscape is needed. On the other hand, an institution trying to limit the spread of a potentially harming fake news on a social network may want to know where and when to hamper the process.

These observation ask for the development of a comprehensive and powerful modelling framework able to describe and predict the evolution of such modern socio-technical systems. Despite the vast amount of work done in this direction, the current modelling scheme is usually focussed at the description of these systems in terms of a set of deterministic or super imposed rules applied to a collection of agents or at the reproduction of statistical properties of one or more observables of the system under consideration (e.g., the distribution of the number of contacts in a network or the distance daily travelled by a person). We think that a different modelling framework has to be adopted when describing these systems.  In particular, we borrow ideas from the field of novelties and innovation dynamics, specifically from the Kauffman's theory of the adjacent possible.  This calls for a change of paradigm because we now frame these systems as living in a space whose topology is unknown and where a person is dynamically interacting with her surrounding space. Moreover, the dynamics of the system, e.g. the places visited by an user during a day, is translated to a series of experiences, either new or old, that the user decides to undergo in his exploratory dynamics.

Our research group already applied this modelling scheme to the description of social networks evolution by using an extended version of a modified Polya model.  In the latter, users are exploring a space of possible connections by reinforcing past experiences and adding new possible connections every time they enter in contact with a novel person. In this way we introduce correlated novelties, where a new thing paves the way for another. Moreover, their next interaction is chosen accordingly to their past experience which is encoded in the perceived social landscape that an user sees. This simple, first principles based model reproduces many of the most relevant observables of human social networks in diverse and complementary field of interactions: from the network of mobile phone calls to the scientific co-authorship net passing by the online social media network formed by the interaction of Twitter users. For example, we are able to reproduce both the decision rule that an user apply to create new connections given his history and the relevant dynamical properties of the network, namely the average degree growth and the emergence of tightly connected users communities linked by weak ties. Moreover, we give a microscopic explanation of the inner mechanism that people apply in expanding their social circles, depending on the social context their are interacting in and their propensity to instantiate social connections. Finally, we observe that the complex, non linear behavior of these system emerges as the product of a tight interaction of local exploration strategies and global organization of the network of contacts between users.

The potential of this alternative approach has already been exploited also in the description of human trajectories within different area of a city. The main statistical properties of urban exploration may be reproduced with a simple mapping between the social model and the corresponding mobility observables. This striking result suggests that we are catching a fundamental decision process that humans apply in their daily life and in different contexts. We then believe that more work should be done in this direction in order to enable a deeper understanding of how these system behave and to introduce in our modelling framework the possibility to introduce perturbations, disruptions and so on in order to provide a powerful and reliable tool for decision makers to design effective policies.

To this end, we are now working on the extension of our framework to model not only the area of the city an users will move in but also the actual location he will visit. Moreover, our aim is to frame all of these results in a comprehensive theoretical framework. The latter is a demanding task as the space in which these system lives is not well defined and is dynamically evolving with the users dynamics (like a moving horizon), so that a mathematical description of it requires the introduction of new and innovative metrics and observables. In the end, we think that the description of human activities and dynamics in terms of an exploration process of correlated novelties in a space of possibilities is a promising field of research that may reveal us deeper insights on human nature and cognitive processes.