The interaction between pathogen strains and its effect on the population level spread of infectious diseases is raising increasing attention nowadays. This is because such interactions affect the infection dynamics and on the efficacy of interventions in many cases. Examples are many. Influenza subtypes have a different morbidity and mortality, thus subtype identity must be accounted for in the planning of interventions and design of vaccination. For pneumococco, serological differences among strains are a major obstacle to vaccination, since they cause strains targeted by vaccines to be replaced by the non-target ones. Other examples include the co-circulation of strains resistant and susceptible to antibiotics in S. aureus, and the complex interaction among Dengue serotypes that affect the pattern of seasonal epidemics. 


Two important questions are common to all these epidemiological situations: what are the drivers of pathogen diversity, i.e. the mechanisms determining the outcome of an emerging variant in terms of persistence/co-circulation/replacement? What are the effects of multi-strain interaction on the population-level spreading dynamics? 


Answering to these questions is a challenge due to the multiple and very diverse factors at the play. Within-host mechanisms cover a central role in that they determine the epidemiological traits. Influenza strains, for instance, can affect either the upper or the lower respiratory tracks, and viral shedding is facilitated in the first of the two cases. Epidemiological traits are important determinants of the spreading dynamics, i.e of the dominance/co-existence outcome, and of the interaction dynamics in case of co-existence. Besides within-host mechanisms, however, environmental and host-population features are important. Increased host mixing, for instance, favours the spread of strains with higher infectivity, as predicted by theoretical works and then backed up by experiments. In influenza and Dengue the dynamics of multiple interacting strains is profoundly altered by a strong seasonal component that determines the timing of the epidemic waves in a given region.


The subject of strain diversity and multi-strain dynamics has gained attention within the theoretical ecology community, where the interplay between strains epidemiological traits in determining co-existence/dominance has been extensively studied. Recently, complex networks theory has provided the perfect ground for studying the effect on strain dynamics of the complex networks of hosts. Complex networks here represent host spatial structure or host social contacts. Several theoretical studies pointed out how the structure of the network affects strain interaction and emergence. 


This research topic however is still at the beginning and several research questions remains open. First, majority of works consider two interacting pathogens only. Studies considering multiple pathogens are very limited and consider in general homogenous interaction rules. In reality multiple pathogens interact with different interaction terms that can be competitive or cooperative. Second, the substrate of strain spread is considered to be static and the dynamical component is often neglected. Human contacts vary in time, also the environmental drivers of transmission can be seasonal. The emergence of an influenza strain for instance was found to be favoured at the end of the influenza season.