Recommender systems are ubiquitous in our  everyday experience. We get books recommended, music recommended, food recommended, items to buy, hotels, trips. Even opinions and ideas. Recommendations are so entangled in our experience that perhaps we cannot even conceive our life without them. Still we base most of our decisions on the suggestions or tips we receive or seek for. 


Like compasses in complex conceptual spaces, recommender systems exploit the knowledge about user behaviours and about the structure of the conceptual space itself, to suggest new directions to take, new experiences. Recommendations typically concern something we may like because it is similar to something we liked in the past or it is similar to something liked by someone else with a personal history similar to ours. The notion of similarity is key here. Two users can be similar if they went through similar experiences and two items can be similar because they share some structural, functional or semantic features. Two items can also be similar also if they co-occurred in the experiences of several users. This idea is brilliantly in place in almost all recommender systems with little variations taking into account personal histories, historical dependences, etc. And it turns out to be also very effective in many sectors where the abundance of data about people choices allows for a very precise profiling of people and items. But all that glitters is not gold!


Recommender systems also have drawbacks. The main one can be dubbed the “tragedy of exploit/explore”. In suggesting us future experiences they are nudging us to go through similar experiences, though every time slightly different. From this perspective they push us to “exploit”. The constant exposure to recommendations is progressively creating what we could name a “comfort zone”, an area, in the space of items or experiences, where we feel at ease. Any suggestions lying in this area  coming from a recommender system would be likely well-perceived. On the other had anything outside this area is very likely to be disregarded or even perceived as uncomfortable. This implies a strong reduction of our ability to “explore”, i.e., experience radically new things. If this seems desirable in a marketing environment to fidelise customers, the potential drawback is to reduce our open-mindedness, confirming our prejudices and preventing us from experiencing more diversity and possibly conflicting views. 


Is it possible to overcome the limitations of current recommender systems, conceiving instead a new generation of recommender systems able to shift the ratio exploit/explore? This is a very pressing question that calls for a global rethinking of the way in which recommenders should accompany us in our everyday experience. Here we address this question by proposing a new generation of recommender systems able to nudge us out of our comfort zone, experiencing instead novel, diverse, though still pleasant experiences.


Recommendation is closely related to the way in which we experience the new. And the experience of the new is something very common in our lives, either at a personal level (for instance the discovery of a new book) or at the global level (for instance when we write a new book). In both cases the experience of the new can be pictured as a path in a very special space, the space of the possible, the space of what could be. Francois Jacob distinguished this space of the “possible” from the space of the “actual”. The “actual” is the set of things we experienced already. The “possible” is the set of things we might possibly experience in the future. 


The question of the exploration of the new is a fascinating one that puzzled generations of scholars. How can we conceive and define the space where novelties can be experienced? How can one estimate the probability for a new event to occur? A very interesting hypothesis in this area has been proposed by Stuart Kauffman, who introduced the the notion of Adjacent Possible. Adjacent Possible is loosely defined as the set of things - could be molecules, organisms, technological products, ideas, etc. - that are one step away from what actually exists and that could be reached by the incremental recombination of the existing elements. The key feature of the adjacent possible space is that its structure is not predefined - Kauffman would say unprestatable -; it gets instead constantly reshaped by the exploration of the space itself. Somehow each of us carves his own adjacent possible space while experiencing the new. 


Here we postulate that the notion of adjacent possible, which already proved to be key to grasp the deep nature of innovation processes, can be adopted to design the new generation of recommender systems resuitable to define a new generation of recommender systems able to nudge us in a path of discovery of the new that progressively dislodges us from our comfort zone. The guiding idea will be that of recommending items “slightly” off with respect to individuals’ comfort zones, still preserving the pleasantness of the experience. These paths outside the comfort zone will touch progressively new elements within the adjacent possible, enlarging in this way the comfort zone and creating the preconditions for further expansions.