Research program


Modeling HCV spread in Egyptian hospitals


Due to a widespread iatrogenic contamination in the 1960’s, Egypt currently has the highest hepatitis C virus (HCV) prevalence worldwide, with up to 30% seropositivity in individuals over 50. Hospitals play a major part in sustaining this epidemic. Indeed, hospitalized patients undergo a high number of invasive procedures making them at risk of acquiring HCV because of imperfect infection control practices. This risk is increased by the high HCV prevalence among patients admitted to hospitals, due to their age and medical history.


Hence, controlling the epidemic of HCV in Egypt requires the control of transmission within hospitals. This may involve a wide array of interventions, such as increasing hygiene, cohorting healthcare workers, isolating or taking special care with HCV-positive patients, etc. However, in order to propose efficient control strategies, a better understanding of HCV spreading dynamics within hospitals is needed. In this context, our research project aims at developing tools to study hospital HCV transmission in Egypt. These tools will help identify targets for control strategies and assess these strategies.


Mathematical models are a useful tool in epidemiology. They allow to better understand infection spread, propose and assess control strategies, and predict future dynamics. Within healthcare settings, they have been used extensively in the last decades to study the spread of resistant bacterial pathogens, as well as viruses such as influenza or Ebola. Several models of HCV spread within drug-user populations in developed countries have also been proposed, as well as a few models of HCV spread within the general Egyptian population, allowing to estimate its epidemic potential in future years. However, no model of HCV spreading dynamics within hospitals has ever been developed. Our project involves developing such a model, using an individual-based stochastic framework.


HCV may be acquired within hospitals through blood exposure during an invasive procedure (e.g. insertion of an intravenous catheter or dialysis) performed with contaminated equipment. The model will therefore reproduce the daily exposure to different types of at-risk procedures of hospitalized patients, depending on patient characteristics. To simulate the spread of HCV from one patient to another, the model will allow for potential medical equipment reuse for distinct patients. The probability of such reuse will depend on the nature of the equipment, the geographical proximity of patients within the hospital, the similarity of procedures they undergo and their sharing of a healthcare worker.


This project will benefit from the detailed data collected in a recent epidemiological study that our team performed in Ain Shams hospital in Cairo. During this 6-month observational study, 500 patients were followed up from hospital admission to discharge. We assessed their HCV status upon admission. All their moves within the hospital were then recorded at the room level, as well as all the invasive procedures that they underwent. This includes information on place, time, date and nature of the procedure, and healthcare worker performing the procedure. We also collected data on infection control practices per procedure, per hospital department and per type of healthcare worker.


The model will reproduce the structure of Ain Shams hospital. We will estimate its parameters using the collected data. We will also use data from the literature on the risk of HCV acquisition when exposed to contaminated medical equipment. In a second step, we will calibrate the parameterized model on the observed HCV prevalence data within the hospital. In the final step of the project, we will use the model to simulate control strategies and assess their efficacy. 


A major national-scale screening program is currently underway in Egypt, with the aim of having identified and put under treatment most of the country’s HCV infected individuals before 2020. The official objective of the Egyptian government is total HCV eradication by 2025. By targeting of the main drivers of the current epidemic, our project has the potential to help achieve this objective.