Chopping Down the Syntax Tree 
(version 3)


Noam Chomsky revolutionized the field of linguistics in the 1950s, but is now facing to be dethroned himself. In the Chomskyan view, the human language faculty is an autonomous, genetically encoded “perfect system” that interfaces with other mental modules (Chomsky 1995). In the past few decades, however, a new approach has emerged that rejects this modular approach and that treats language as an integral part of cognition and social interaction. This rising paradigm shift is changing everything about how we think of our capacity to learn and use language.


The grammatical theory that embodies the counter-movement the most is called construction grammar. Construction grammars exist in different flavors, but they share the idea that all linguistic information can be represented using a single data structure: constructions. Unfortunately, construction grammarians have been reluctant to offer a precise definition of what a construction is. Instead, they informally describe their most important data structure as “any mapping between meaning and form”. This lack of formal rigour invites linguists to recycle the formal tools that were developed within mainstream linguistics, or even to abandon formalization completely. It also means that Chomskyan linguistics can still safely defend their grip on the field.


Recent developments in computational linguistics, however, have provided construction grammarians with a methodological axe for finally chopping down the tree structures that occupy a central position in Chomskyan linguistics.


Construction grammarians feel that tree structures are not adequate representation devices for their linguistic analyses. Perhaps this is because they are too young to remember the days before the Chomskyan revolution, so they have grown up knowing only the mathematically well-defined tree structures of mainstream linguistics. While there is some variation among theories, the core primitives of those tree structures are that (a) all local tree configurations consist of a single parent node and its immediate children, and that (b) syntactic constituents are continuous. 


However, such tree diagrams are like the trees of royal gardens that have been clipped into perfect shapes or ornamental figures. Before Chomsky, linguists were very liberal with their analyses, allowing discontinuous constituents and nodes with multiple parents (McCawley 1982, Blevins 1990). McCawley (1982) writes that there has never been any real justification for introducing such strong restrictions. Instead, he claims that they are the result of historical accident: early Chomskyan linguists were familiar with automata theory but not with graph theory, so they devised methods that were better suited for describing sets of strings than for sets of trees. Tree structures were therefore originally only the by-product for describing strings, so they had to be pruned to fit the surface form of those strings.


But even if you liberate syntactic trees from the constraints of single-dominance and continuity, you still end up with a single representation device from which you must “read off” all other kinds of information. For instance, grammatical functions such as Subject and Object have been reinterpreted as structural positions in mainstream linguistics: the subject is the node to the left of a sentence’s verb phrase, and the object is the node that is in the verb’s “immediate domain”. As such, grammatical functions are no longer primitive categories in mainstream linguistic theory. The same strategy applies for other layers of information such as argument structure and discourse structure. Construction grammarians no longer want to shoehorn those structures onto a syntax tree.


Functional theories of linguistics propose a separate layer for these different kinds of information. This solution, however, creates an interface problem because you need to define linking rules to connect each layer. Moreover, “all grammars leak” as Edward Sapir famously said, so it is not easy to neatly distinguish between different layers without introducing a great deal of redundancy. For example, a syntactic rule such as putting an adjective before a noun (as in the sleeping child or the scared man) may be sensitive to the phonological properties of the adjective, since the so-called a-adjectives resist occurring in this configuration (as in ??the asleep child or ??the afraid man). Likewise, morphological rules may depend on the semantics of a word: a mass noun such as water cannot be combined with the plural marker -s unless you conceptualize the water as an object (e.g. as two rivers, or as two glasses of water), in which case you can say two waters. It should be no surprise, then, that functional theories have never achieved the same degree of formalization as Chomskyan theories of language.


Enter Charles J. Fillmore, or “Chuck” as his friends and colleagues would call him. Fillmore considered himself as an OWL, just another Ordinary Working Linguist.