Chopping Down the Syntax Tree 
(version 2)


Noam Chomsky revolutionized the field of linguistics in the 1950s, but is now facing to be dethroned himself. In the Chomskyan view, the human language faculty is an autonomous and “perfect system” that interfaces with other mental modules. In the past few decades, however, a new paradigm has emerged that rejects Chomsky’s modular approach and that treats language as an integral part of cognition instead. The grammatical theory that embodies this new paradigm the most is called construction grammar.


Construction grammarians come in all shapes and sizes, but they all agree that all linguistic information can be represented using a single data structure: constructions. Unfortunately, researchers of the construction grammar community have been reluctant to offer a precise definition of what a construction is, and instead informally 


Unfortunately, construction grammarians have been reluctant to offer 












The field of linguistics has been undergoing a silent revolution in recent decades. For more than half a century, 




This view 










. Chomsky argues that the human language faculty is a “perfect system” that exists as an independent mental module. 




If Noam Chomsky’s Visiting Martian would travel back to earth to catch up with the latest developments in linguistics, they would be intrigued by a new species of language researchers: construction grammarians. Construction grammarians come in all shapes and sizes, but they all agree that all linguistic information can be represented by a single data structure: constructions. 




This idea revolutionizes how we conceive of the human language faculty: 




no more separation between words and syntax, no more distinction between rules and exceptions, and no more need to split up language into different mental modules. But what exactly is a construction and what can it do?


A first striking observation is that construction grammarians tend to avoid tree diagrams for analyzing the structure of sentences that other linguists love so much. 








Construction grammarians tend to avoid to use tree diagrams for analyzing the structure of sentences that other linguists love so much. This puzzles the Visiting Martian, and they 




The Visiting Martian is 








“perfect system”