Research program


Modeling HCV spread in Egyptian hospitals


Egypt currently has the highest hepatitis C virus (HCV) prevalence worldwide, with up to 30% seropositivity in individuals over 50. This results from a widespread iatrogenic contamination during mass immunization campaigns against schistosomiasis in the 1960’s. HCV is primarily acquired through exposure to contaminated blood or blood products. It is responsible for chronic infections that may persist for decades, leading to liver cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma.


Hospitals play a major part in sustaining this epidemic in Egypt. Indeed, hospitalized patients undergo a high number of invasive procedures. Because of imperfect infection control practices, they are at risk of acquiring HCV during these procedures. For instance, HCV contamination may occur following re-use of inadequately sterilized syringes or needles. This risk is increased by the high HCV prevalence among patients admitted to hospitals, due to their age and medical history.


Hence, controlling the epidemic of HCV in Egypt requires the control of transmission within hospitals. This may involve a wide array of interventions. Healthcare workers could improve their hygiene practices during invasive procedures. Hospitals could cohort their staff by department or ward. They could also implement specific care processes for at-risk patients or in at-risk areas. 


However, in order to propose efficient control interventions, a better understanding of HCV spreading dynamics within hospitals is needed. In this context, our research project aims at developing a mathematical model to study hospital HCV transmission in Egypt. This model will help identify targets for control interventions and assess these interventions.


Mathematical models are useful in epidemiology. They allow to better understand infection spread, propose and assess control strategies, and predict future dynamics. Within healthcare settings, they have been used extensively in the last decades to study the spread of resistant bacterial pathogens, as well as viruses such as influenza or Ebola. Regarding HCV, published models have mostly focused on drug-user populations in developed countries. One model of HCV spread within the general Egyptian population has allowed to estimate its epidemic potential in future years. However, no model of HCV dynamics within hospitals has ever been developed. 


We will simulate the spread of HCV between patients through two main processes, assuming that HCV is acquired during an invasive procedure performed with contaminated equipment. First, the model will reproduce the daily exposure of hospitalized patients to different types of at-risk procedures, such as insertion of an intravenous catheter or dialysis. For each procedure, the exposure frequency will depend on patient and hospital department characteristics. Second, the model will allow for potential medical equipment reuse for distinct patients. The probability of such reuse will depend on the nature of the equipment, the geographical proximity of patients within the hospital, the similarity of procedures they undergo and their sharing of a healthcare worker. HCV may be acquired within hospitals. The model will account for inter-individual heterogeneity and randomness in the modeled processes through an individual-based stochastic framework.


This project will benefit from the detailed data collected in a recent epidemiological study that our team performed in Ain Shams hospital in Cairo. During this 6-month observational study, we followed 500 patients from hospital admission to discharge. We assessed their HCV status upon admission. All their moves within the hospital were then recorded at the room level, as well as all the invasive procedures that they underwent. This includes information on place, time, date and nature of the procedure, and healthcare worker performing the procedure. We also collected data on infection control practices per procedure, per hospital department and per type of healthcare worker.


The model will reproduce the structure of Ain Shams hospital. We will estimate its parameters using the collected data. We will also use data from the literature on the risk of HCV acquisition when exposed to contaminated medical equipment. We will then calibrate the parameterized model on the observed HCV prevalence data within the hospital. In the final step of the project, we will use the model to simulate several control strategies and compare their efficacy. 


A major national-scale screening program is currently underway in Egypt. The government aims at having identified and put under treatment most of the country’s HCV infected individuals before 2020. The official objective is total HCV eradication by 2025. By targeting one of the main drivers of the current epidemic, our project has the potential to help achieve this objective.