Causality sounds like one of the least mysterious, most mechanical, unforgiving thing. When this happens, that happens. When this is, that comes to be. No trace of poetry, desire or intention. Yet, there is a universe, planets and stars, life, consciousness, and emotions, and many of us are trying to understand how it all emerged out of causes and effects. Causality doesn't need to eliminate fantasy. How complex networks of causes and effects create such diversity can be a source of awe in itself.


Causality can easily be represented as computer programs with logical statements. If this is true is true, this happens, otherwise that happens. And computer programs are good at executing many such causes and effects, chaining them together, quickly, such that we can study the unfolding of big and complex networks of causes and effects. The worlds causal networks cannot be imported in a computer and just run in simulation, but we can study small parts of it that will help us understand how causality plays out in certain parts of the world, from cells to societies.        


An example is the segregation of people. There are many reason why people can segregate by wealth, religion, or skin color. The economist Thomas Shelling revealed one using simulation. Human behaviour is too complex to put in a computer, but he made only a simple human. Imagine a grid where people can settle, and that there are only two kinds of people, red and green. Let's say that this imaginary world is much simpler than ours, and there is only one rule with which people will decide to stay were they are or move somewhere else. These people don't mind having different people aroind, but they want to have at least a few neighbours around them that are like them, say 3. If they don't they will move to another place, and will keep doing this until they are happy. The researcher wrote a program with these rules and observed that very quickly, the grid settles into segregated areas of red people with no green, and areas of green people without red.


He made the point that simple rules can produce segregation without people's explicit intention of producing it. Local choices, when playing together, can produce unexpected output. The surprise comes from the important number of
choices, to the point where our minds fail to keep track of them all and foresee how they play out together.


The network size isn't the only reason for this surprise. Cellular automata are simple grids of cells that can be either on or off, black or white. From one step to another, each cell updates its state based on the state of it's immediate neighbour. For example, if the rule is for a cell to become black when at least one of it's neighbour is, the whole grid started with some black cells randomly scattered will quickly turn completely black. Another rule given by the matematician John Conway, freely inspirated from life itself, is to turn a white cell black when it has 2 or 3 neighbours, as if they had given life to it, and make a black cell die of being over crowded if it has more than 4 neighbours. With this rule, the successive progression of timesteps animates the grid into a surprising swarm of cells that seem to be moving around and clustering into groups of various sizes, interacting with one another, combining, diing.


Big causal network can be complex and surprising. What makes them complex isn't clear. Computers are the laboratory tools to study causality at a large scale.