My intention with this text is to introduce a usage of computer simulation in scientific research to  a non-scientific audience. I may publish it as a blog article… It’s got me thinking about writing others like this, using specific example of simulation experiments.


How could deterministic predictable machines like computers help us understand the unpredictable, surprising world we live in? Computers run sequences of instructions with exact precision. The same instructions always produce the same result. On the contrary, an event rarely happens exactly the same twice in societies, ecosystems or living beings.


Computer programs are capable of dynamics which can hint at unexpected explanations of social and natural phenomena. Nature and society are grounds to complex cascades of causes and consequences. Fluid dynamics in the atmosphere drive the weather, political and social conditions spark revolutions, evolution and natural selection yield a variety of life forms. These large scale events result from interacting causal relationships between particles, human beings or living species. Simpler yet still complex sets of causes and effects can be written as logical statements in a computer program. Computers can unfold the resulting dynamics, and we can witness and study them in great details. 


Computer programs can display complex and surprising dynamics, despite their boring determinism. As an example, the mathematician John Conway came up with a computer program called the game of life, freely inspired from the life of biological cells. It consists of a grid of square cells. Each can be alive, drawn in black colour, or dead, drawn white. They change state step by step according to precise rules and their neighbours’ states. A dead cell surrounded by 3 live neighbours becomes live, as if the others had given birth to it. A live cell that is surrounded by less than 2 or more than 3 live neighbours dies, as if by underpopulation or overpopulation. These rules animate the grid step by step into a swarm of black cells on a white background, forming lasting structures that seem to be moving around, running into each other, disintegrating or creating one another. Even when an observer is aware of the set of rules ruling this system, he or she is struct with astonishment.


Other surprising dynamics on a computer cue us on unexpected explanations of social phenomena. An example comes up when studying the segregation. People may segregate by wealth, religion, or color for a variety of reasons. The economist Thomas Schelling unveiled one of them using a computer simulation. He imagined a world where green or red people live on a grid. In this simple world, simple people want to have at least 3 neighbours like them. They are comfortable with only 3, but if they have less they will move to another place until they are happy. The researcher wrote a program with these rules and observed that very quickly, as people move around, the grid settles into segregated areas of red people without green, and areas of green people without red. On average, people end up having not just 3 neighbours like them, but twice as many.


The study illustrates that computers can serve to test hypotheses about how causality works in society. Schelling’s hypothesis was that strong segregation can come from individual choices that seem to leave room for more social mix. It is the collective interplay of individual preferences that reinforced segregation.


The world’s surprising phenomena and diversity have taken us on a quest for understanding. We shape our understanding by making hypotheses and testing them. When we can state a hypothesis as unambiguous logical statements, we can witness it’s unfolding to its logical conclusion in simulation. Like laboratory experiments and field studies, successful simulation experiments do not lead to definite conclusions about how the world works. They merely, but crucially, help us build arguments for or against what can happen.