Aim: Develop knowledge on care pathways of persons with MS to enhance care consumption.


Since its first definition, the concept of care pathway has provoked a great interest worldwide, especially in France. This notion aims at defining the successive use of the right care resources for each patient at the best time. Usually defined for a given disease, especially a chronic disease in France, this concept mostly remains theoretical and must be based on data issued from observational studies. However, there is still no clearly definite care pathway for some diseases, such as multiple sclerosis (MS) even if around 100,000 persons are affected by this disease in France. Therefore, there is currently a need for the development of studies in France on this specific subject to develop knowledge on care pathways of persons with MS (PwMS) and allow for the definition of recommendations for care pathway.


Firstly, a better knowledge of these pathways may be useful in order to have a better characterization of the use of care resources by PwMS. Indeed, several healthcare professionals (medical and paramedical) are involved in MS care and may act altogether in order to provide the best care. This characterization will also serve to identify needs of this specific population, especially unmet needs.
Related to the identification of unmet needs, this description may offer the opportunity to target specific research questions and thus show how research can directly answer to patients’ needs. 


The development of a care pathway for MS may also limit the occurrence of adverse events which may be linked to treatments. Indeed, most of the time these events could be prevent by seeing the right specialist before starting a therapy or by seeing regularly a general practitioner for example.
These adverse events have also a direct impact on the quality of life of PwMS, which is often already lower than in general population. It has even been shown that when achieving a high level of disability, people consider their life is even worse than death itself.


Cost of MS in France represented more than 1.3 billion euros in 2015, which corresponds to around 11,900 euros per patient. Reducing adverse events may lead to a lower care consumption and thus to 


Argument 1: Better knowledge → Less care consumption → Economical benefit




Argument 4: Better knowledge → target specific research questions to develop afterwards (treatments, paramedical care)
Argument 5: Better knowledge → Best care to people → Best quality of life
Argument 6: we have data at disposal : administrative data