The interaction between pathogen strains and its effect on the population level spread of infectious diseases is raising increasing attention nowadays. This is because such interactions have been found to have an effect on the infection dynamics and on the efficacy of interventions. Examples are many. Influenza subtypes, have a different morbidity and mortality, thus subtype identity must be accounted for in the planning of interventions and design of vaccination. For pneumococco, serological differences among strains are a major obstacle to vaccination, because strains targeted by vaccines are replaced by the non-target ones. Other examples include the co-circulation of strains resistant and susceptible to antibiotics in S. aureus, and the complex interaction among Dengue serotypes that affect the pattern of seasonal epidemics. 


Two important questions are common to all these epidemiological situations: what are the drivers of pathogen diversity, i.e. the mechanisms determining the outcome of an emerging variant in terms of persistence/co-circulation/replacement? What are the effects of multi-strain interaction on the population-level spreading dynamics? 


Answering to these questions is a challenge due to the multiple and very diverse factors at the play. Within-host mechanisms cover a central role in that they give raise to the epidemiological traits and interaction forces among strains. Influenza strains, for instance, can affect either the upper or the lower respiratory tracks, and viral shedding is facilitated in the first of the two cases. The difference in epidemiological traits may result in an epidemiological advantage of one strain over the others - leading it to dominance -, or, in case of co-existence, it may affect the epidemic patterns. Besides within-host mechanisms, however, environmental and host-population features are important. Host mixing, for instance, favours the spread of strains with higher infectivity, as predicted by theoretical works and then backed up by experiments. In influenza and Dengue the dynamics of multiple interacting strains is profoundly altered by a strong seasonal component that determines the timing of the epidemic waves in a given region.


The subject of strain diversity and multi-strain dynamics has gained a lot of attention within the theoretical ecology community, where the interplay between strains epidemiological traits in determining co-existence/dominance has been extensively studied. The field is quite vast ...
Details 


Recently the framework of complex networks has provided the perfect ground for studying the role on strain dynamics of the complex connectivity of human population. Complex networks here represent host spatial structure or host social contacts. Several theoretical studies pointed out how the structure of the network affects strain interaction and emergence. 


Fundings 


This research topic however is still at the beginning and several research questions remains open. First majority of works consider two interacting pathogens only. Studies considering multiple pathogens are very limited and consider in general homogenous interaction rules. In reality multiple pathogens interact with different interaction terms that can be competitive or cooperative. Second the substrate of strain spread is considered to be static and the dynamical component is often neglected. Human contacts vary in time, also the environmental drivers of transmission can be seasonal. The emergence of an influenza strain for instance was found to be favoured at the of the influenza season.