The interaction between pathogen strains and its effect on the population level spread of infectious diseases is raising increasing attention nowadays. This is because such interactions have been found to have an effect on the infection dynamics and on the efficacy of interventions. Influenza subtypes, for instance, have a different morbidity and mortality, thus their heterogeneous properties must be accounted for in the planning of interventions and design of vaccination. For bacterial infections such as pneumococco, serological differences among strains may cause the failure of vaccination campaigns, when developed vaccines, targeting only one subset of strains, cause strain replacement instead of reducing the overall disease burden. Other examples, include the emergence of antimicrobial resistance and the difficulty in anticipating and mitigating Dengue epidemics due to the complex and heterogeneous interactions among different strains. 


Two important questions are common to all these epidemiological situations: what are the drivers of pathogen diversity, i.e. the mechanisms determining the outcome of an emerging variant in terms of persistence/co-circulation/replacement? What are the effects of multi-strain interaction on the population-level spreading dynamics? Answering to these questions is a challenge due to the multiple and very diverse factors at the play. Clearly within-host mechanisms cover a central role The challenge behind this question is due to the interplay between the different biological, environmental and population level factors at the play. 


The subject has gained a lot of attention within the theoretical ecology community where the interplay between strains epidemiological traits in determining co-existence/dominance has been extensively studied. 
Details 


Recently the framework of complex networks has provided the perfect ground for studying the role on strain dynamics of the complex connectivity of human population. Complex networks here represent host spatial structure or host social contacts. Several theoretical studies pointed out how the structure of the network affects strain interaction and emergence. 


Fundings 


This research topic however is still at the beginning and several research questions remains open. First majority of works consider two interacting pathogens only. Studies considering multiple pathogens are very limited and consider in general homogenous interaction rules. In reality multiple pathogens interact with different interaction terms that can be competitive or cooperative. Second the substrate of strain spread is considered to be static and the dynamical component is often neglected. Human contacts vary in time, also the environmental drivers of transmission can be seasonal. The emergence of an influenza strain for instance was found to be favoured at the of the influenza season.


How can we address these questions