A Communication and Information Technology tailored on the shape of our minds


Something is rotten in the state of the Internet. In a 2018 interview Tim Barners-Lee said: “for many years there was a feeling that the wonderful things on the web were going to dominate and we’d have a world with less conflict, more understanding, more and better science, and good democracy”. Nowadays, instead, “humanity connected by technology on the web is functioning in a dystopian way. We have online abuse, prejudice, bias, polarisation, fake news, there are lots of ways in which it is broken.” 
Several voices raised alarms and many authorities are trying to face the issues. For example, the Office of the High Commissioner for the Human Rights of the United Nations, recently released a series of guidelines for various nations, pushing governments to fix the most ugent emergencies about the web. It took a decade for humans to implement the largest infrastructure of their history, and in the same amount of time the utopian visions about the impact of the internet turned into dystopian ones. How could that happen?
Several studies link the dangers for the web to the design of our Information and Communication Technologies. In particular, Information Filtering systems and Recommender Systems. If their role is still under debate, it is not debatable their crucial importance our experience of the web. Those systems are in charge to help us to browse the expanding online world. They are an unavoidable passage for almost every content we experience online. In social media platform, if something it is not proposed by a Recommender System, it is as if it does not exist at all. And with an increasing number of persons switching to social media platforms as main news providers, the role of these systems is becoming more and more important for the very foundation of our societies.
Literature is divided on the effects of Recommender Systems. The main point of controversy is the impact of those systems on the diversity of contents proposed to the user. This diversity influences people vision of reality. Some researchers stated that diversity is improved by those systems. Instead, many others argue that personalised Recommendation Systems strongly decrease diversity of contents. And this might cause bias, homophily, polarization, intolerance and the tendency to believe and to spread fake news.
This negative effect on diversity might be caused by an aspect often neglected in the design of Recommender Systems: human nature. In fact, humans for ages showed the propension to group in polarized tribes or to spread fake news about other tribes. It is already in our nature. But classic Information Filtering System are not taking into the account the peculiarity of human cognitive mechanism of information elaboration. Let us take, for example, the most popular Recommender System,  the so called Collaborative Filtering. 
Collaborative Filtering is based on the assumption that similar users will like similar contents, that sounds very reasonable. The success of this methodology is due to several factors. It is an algorithm very elegant, from the conceptual point of view. Matrix factorization techniques involved are formally very simple. Other strong points are the precision in the recommendation of appreciated contents, the ease of implementation and its scalability. Also, an important advantage is that the algorithm just need data about past user activity on the same platform. The past preference of some users will drive the future of other users. The problem is that humans on their own already have the tendency to form polarized tribes. If we base our suggestions plainly on human behaviour, we create a reinforcement loop pushing this mechanism to the extreme.
We need to take into the account the way in which humans process informations, the cognitive biases we all have. We have a natural tendency to homophily, to tribes, to repetition of the old comfortable things we like, to believe what we like. So, human nature might be the cause of the issues when neglected in the design of our information technologies. But the same human nature might also contain the solution. 
One of our major trait as a specie is the ability to learn new things. As we are attracted by our past, we are also pushed toward novelties by our curiosity. We should probably try to reproduce this balance in our Information Filtering Systems. There is a urgent need for a novel generation of Information and Communication Technologies tailored on the shape of our mind, aware of the way we process information. We need to base Recommender Systems on a novel framework.
The task of Recommender System should not be to propose us something we will like but a more complex one. We should consider the proposition of new contents as a learning process. Or, more precisely, a process of information extraction. Each piece of novel information extracted gives to the user some sort of value. Then, the task of Recommendation System should be to optimize the amount of value extracted by a user during the path. And this is a very complex task. 
The first big question is the semantic distance between the suggested contents and the user. The content cannot be too close to the user, otherwise it would be completely known and thus boring. No value will be extracted since no new information will be available. Also, the semantic distance cannot be too high. In that case the content could be unintelligible or unpleasant. It has been proven that contents too far from a given point of view could result in a “backfire” effects. The distance of contents from the user has to be delicately calibrated. This requires several ingredients. first, an accurate reconstruction of the semantics of the space of contents. Then, the definition of the distance between contents and the user, that does not simply lies on the space of contents. FInally, a model of user reactions to the contents in function of their distance.
The second big question concerns the possibility for Recommendation Systems to draw learning paths. When the Recommendation System suggests a content it should also consider the structure of the space. Each time a content is consumed, the distance from those semantically close to him will be lowered.  In other words, new parts of the space will become more accessible. The user will be able to extract value from items that before were too far. This kind of dynamics of unlocking items has been studied in the research about the so called Adjacent Possible. 
Several intellectual tool coming from statistical physics can help in the definition of the new framework for Recommender System. As, also, the wide literature about human cognitive abilities. Several of the strategic pieces are probably there. Fake news, polarization and biases are often faced as separate problems by governments and institutions. Often they try to fix them with focalised interventions. This effort need to be extended also to an intellectual one in the comprehension of the issues and in the conception of novel theories and tools. In other words, we need to embrace the challenge of redesigning our information system to make the web closer to what it was meant to be at the dawn of the Internet age. Before we reach the sunset.