A Communication and Information Technology tailored on the shape of our minds


Something is rotten in the state of the Internet. In a 2018 interview Tim Barners-Lee said: “for many years there was a feeling that the wonderful things on the web were going to dominate and we’d have a world with less conflict, more understanding, more and better science, and good democracy”. Nowadays, instead, “humanity connected by technology on the web is functioning in a dystopian way. We have online abuse, prejudice, bias, polarisation, fake news, there are lots of ways in which it is broken.” Several voices raised alarms and many authorities are trying to face the issues. For example, the Office of the High Commissioner for the Human Rights of the United Nations, recently released a series of guidelines for various nations, pushing governments to fix the most ugent emergencies about the web. It took a decade for humans to implement the largest infrastructure of their history, and in the same amount of time the utopian visions about the impact of the internet turned into dystopian ones. How could that happen?
Several studies link the dangers for the web to the design of our Information and Communication Technologies. In particular, Information Filtering systems and Recommender Systems. If their role is still under debate, it is not debatable their crucial importance our experience of the web. Those system are the unavoidable passage for almost every content we experience online. In social media platform, if something it is not proposed by a Recommender System, it is as if it does not exist at all. And with an increasing number of persons switching to social media platforms as main news providers, the role of these systems is becoming more and more important for the very foundation of our societies.
Literature is divided on the effects of Recommender Systems. The main point of controversy is the impact of those systems on the diversity of contents proposed to the user. This diversity influences people vision of reality. Some researchers stated that diversity is improved by those systems. Instead, many others researchers argue that Recommendation Systems could decrease diversity of contents. And that might cause bias, homophily, polarization, intolerance and the tendency to believe and to spread fake news.
This negative effect on diversity might be caused by an aspect often neglected in the design of Recommender Systems: human nature. In fact, humans, by themselves, for ages showed the propension to group in polarized tribes or to spread fake news about other tribes. It is already in our nature. But Information Filtering System are not taking into the account the peculiarity of human cognitive mechanism of information elaboration. 
For example, the most popular technique for the implementation of a Recommender System is the so called Collaborative Filtering. It is simply based on the assumption that similar users will like similar contents, that sounds very reasonable. The success of this methodology is due to several factors. These methods are formally elegant. Matrix factorization techniques involved are formally very simple. Other strongest points might be the precision in the recommendation of appreciated contents, the ease of implementation and its scalability. Also, an important advantage is that the algorithm uses information about users behaviours. The past preference of some users will drive the future of other users. The problem is that humans on their own already have the tendency to form polarized Tribes. If we base our suggestions plainly on human behaviour, we create a reinforcement loop pushing this mechanism to the extreme.
We need to take into the account the way in which we process informations, the cognitive biases we all have. We have a natural tendency to homophily, to tribes, to repetition of the old comfortable things we like. But if the problem might be in the human nature and in the neglection of it in the design of our information technologies, our very nature also might contain the solution. One of our major trait as a specie is the ability to learn. As we are attracted by our past, we are also pushed toward novelties by our curiosity. 
There is a urgent need for a novel generation of information and communication technologies tailored on the shape of our mind, aware of the actual way we process information. In the specific case of the Recommender Systems, we probably need to base them on a novel framework, where the task is not anymore to propose to the users something they will like but a more complex one. We should consider the proposition of new contents as a learning process. Or, more precisely, a process of information extraction. Each piece of novel information extracted gives to the user some sort of value. Then, the task of Recommendation System should be to optimize the amount of value extracted by a user during the path. This is a complex task. 
On one side there is the problem of semantic distance between the suggested content and the person point of view. The content cannot be too close to the user, otherwise it would be completely known and thus boring. No value will be extracted since no new information will be there. Also, the semantic distance cannot be too high. In that case the content could be unintelligible or unpleasant (it has been proven that contents too far from a given point of view could result in a “backfire” effects). 
On the other side, when the Recommendation System suggests a content it should also consider the structure of the space of contents, and how much of that space learning a specific content will make accessible. In fact, this will allow the user to extract value from other new contents. This kind of dynamics of unlocking has been studied in the research about the so called Adjacent Possible. 
Several intellectual tool coming from statistical physics can help in the definition of the new framework for Recommender System. As, also, the wide literature about human cognitive abilities. Several of the strategic pieces are probably there. Fake news, polarization and biases are often faced as separate problems by governments and institutions. Often they try to fix them with focalised interventions. This effort need to be extended also to an intellectual one in the comprehension of the issues and in the conception of novel theories and tools. In other words, we need to embrace the challenge of redesigning our information system to make the web closer to what it was meant to be at the dawn of the Internet age. Before we reach the sunset.