The last decades have witnessed the emergence of complex network science as a powerful and versatile framework. Its applications span are diverse, and span different fields, like neuroscience, social sciences, epidemiology, finance. By representing a system in terms of agents (nodes) and relationships among them (links) scientists can use tools inherited from physics, mathematics and computer science, and uncover emergent properties previously overlooked.
Network science finds applications beyond ‘hard sciences’, as, for instance, history. The historical evolution of many institutions can be represented in terms of relationships among agents. The main drawback is, however, that reliable, unbiased records are often missing, or hidden in ancient volumes. Thanks to recent digitization efforts, that might be about to change.
In this work, we study the evolution of one of the most influential religious organizations in human history: the Roman Catholic Church (RCC). Its influence stretching far out the spiritual world, the RCC has been a major political actor in the last two millennia. 




We do that For centuries, it has managed spiritual and religious life in several European countries.
%It has guarded orthodoxy in both theological matters and ritual practice. 
Disputes on its primacy lead to Christianity's most meaningful events: the East-West schism\footnote{Break-up between the Western church (Roman) and the Eastern churches (Orthodox), 1054 A.D..} and the Protestant Reformation\footnote{Birth of Protestantism following the schism with the Roman Catholic Church. Started in 1517 following the publication of Martin Luther's {\itshape Ninety-Five Theses}.}.
Its influence stretching far out the spiritual world, the Roman Catholic Church (RCC) has been a major political actor in the last two millenia\footnote{The Edict of Thessalonica made Christianity the official religion of the Roman empire in 380 A.D..}.
Challenging its political clout has often meant going to war, or losing one's own temporal authority. The bowing of emperor Henry IV to Pope Gregory VII\footnote{In 1076 A.D. Pope Gregory VII excommunicated the emperor Henry IV of the Holy Roman Empire as the latter would not recognize pope's exclusive right of appointing clergymen. The excommunication undermined the emperor's authority, so that one year later he bowed to the Pope and asked his forgiveness in the episode known as the {\itshape Humiliation of Canossa}.} exemplifies well the past political power of the RCC.
The last centuries have reshaped the role of the RCC on the World stage, but not diminished it. The catholic faith has spread far outside Europe, reaching nowadays $1.28$ billion faithful\footnote{Number of baptized in 2017 according to Ref.~\cite{AnnuarioPontificio2017}.}.