The last decades have witnessed the emergence of complex network science as a powerful and versatile framework. Its applications span are diverse, and span different fields, like neuroscience, social sciences, epidemiology, finance. By representing a system in terms of agents (nodes) and relationships among them (links) scientists can use tools inherited from physics, mathematics and computer science, and uncover emergent properties previously overlooked.
Network science finds applications beyond ‘hard sciences’, as, for instance, history. The historical evolution of many institutions can be represented in terms of relationships among agents. The main drawback is, however, that reliable, unbiased records are often missing, or hidden in ancient volumes. Thanks to recent digitization efforts, that might be about to change.
In this work, we study the evolution of one of the most influential religious organizations in human history: the Roman Catholic Church (RCC). Its influence stretching far out the spiritual world, the RCC has been a major political actor in the last two millennia. More than 2,000 years after its creation, the RCC remains a major political actor at both national and international scales, and represents 1.28 bn faithful around the World.
We will study the RCC by focusing on the genealogy of its highest ranking clergymen: Bishops. Within RCC's unique polity, bishops play the role of ministers, governors, ambassadors. Bishops derive their religious and administrative authority by means of uninterrupted sequence of consecrator-consecrated relations, the apostolic succession. Each new bishop always being consecrated by a group of (typically) three other bishops, thus creating a genealogy spanning several centuries. This genealogy is a perfect subject of quantitative longitudinal investigation,  as the hierarchy of the RCC has remained unchanged over the centuries. Reliable data start from the beginning of the 15th Century, and comprise more than 30,000 bishops.
Clearly, in this genealogical network, links between bishops do not mark biological kinship: they represent doctrinal and