Genealogies of the Roman Catholic Church
introduction part of scientific paper


Complex networks have fostered scientific progress in many fields, like neuroscience, economics, epidemiology, ecology, sociology. Their scope of application now stretches to the humanities, where they can uncover emergent properties that would escape traditional qualitative approaches. This, however, is possible only for large, comprehensive datasets. One example is computational linguistics and the analysis of digitized corpora and dictionaries. Another promising field is history, provided we have a way of accessing and handling large-scale historical records.


In this work we study the history of the Roman Catholic Church (RCC), through the analysis of the genealogical records of its ministers. The RCC is the religious organization presiding over the catholic faith, a branch of christianity. It features a hierarchical clergy headed by the pope. Immense political power has rested in the RCC. It has shaped the history of Europe for two millennia. Nowadays, it counts 1.28 bn faithful spread around the World, and is a major political actor at the global scale. Bishops, its highest-ranking clergymen, hold both the religious and administrative power. Only bishops can elevate others to their rank, through the rite of consecration. These consecrators-consecrated relationships induce a genealogical structure, that goes back for centuries. Unlike a family tree, however, these relationships do not represent biological kinship. They instead mark doctrinal and political proximity, opening a new perspective on the history of such an influential organization.


We use a dataset containing biographical data on over 30,000 bishops, from the 15th century to present day, together with their consecration records. This is possible because the structure of the RCC has changed very little for centuries, leading to reliable historical recording. We represent these data as a network of consecrations, and study its historical evolution.


We combine tools from network science and phylogeny. To this end, we define a genome that each bishop inherits from his consecrators, and passes on to the ones he consecrates. We design its structure, and how it gets transmitted. The study then focuses on the contribution of ancient bishops to modern lineages, discovering that a small group of ancient bishops is responsible for more than XX% of the current genome. Their crucial role in shaping the history of the RCC had until now escaped traditional historical investigation. 


We cluster bishops according to genome similarity, and discover the existence of two large groups, competing throughout the centuries. One is very ancient, and used to be highly prevalent since the 19th century, while the other laid dormant and geographically contained in Eastern Europe. Then, in the last 50 years, the latter quickly took over in bishop population. This transition is concomitant with the transformation of the RCC from a Europe-centered organization to a truly globalized entity. We also identify the bishops who played a key role in the takeover of the latter genome.


In our work we shed a new light on the history of the RCC, by reading its evolution on the genealogical network of its highest-ranking clergy. We demonstrate that data-driven, quantitative historical analysis can uncover unknown patterns and pinpoint previously overlooked pivotal figures. The methodology developed here will be useful to other historical contexts, for which genealogical data are available.