Technological advances allow to study creativity from a quantitative point of view. Historically creativity has been seen as something misterius and innate. However in recent years many courses and books promise to teach how to be creative. This shows a change in the perception of creativity as something whose mechanics may be learnt and studied. Psychologists were the first to study creativity. Their studies are focused on the creativity of the individual. This approach was forced by the great effort required to get data about a vast group of people. Modern technologies instead allow to reach larger number of individuals, record their actions and to compare their production. Researchers can now collect data about any kind of creative product, may it be a piece of art, a written text or a new object to be mass-produced. This new opportunities allow to get more quantitative research and to study the creativity content of the individual products.


Scholars, creatives and investors are all interested in the creative content of products. The problem is extremely challenging from a theoretical point of view. It requires the design of a completely new set of tools. Few of the existing tools can be used without adjustments and all have to prove to be valid. Creatives and investors in creativity
There is a great interest in studying the factors that contribute to make a product creative. Also is interesting and useful to distinguish creative products from simply successful ones. 


Progresses in this field have been slowed by the difficulties in finding adequate data to sustain or negate any theory. For example data available on the web allow studies on large systems but with little control on which data are recorded. This often negates the possibility to get a strong external validation of the findings. With this kind of data is also difficult to study the fine details of the dynamics of the system. The mechanics that determines the success or the failure of a product may remain concealed. 


An experiment can reproduce in vitro the key features of a creative process. The approach in use until now is based on the observation of a creative system more than in its reproduction. This is due to the intrinsic difficulties in the reproduction of creativity dynamics.  Many interacting individuals and a creative goal are necessary to reproduce such systems. 


Creativity depend both on the degree of innovation the product introduces and in the success it gains. Complete originality often leads to uselessness or being incomprehensible thus the product won’t be purchased, imitated, praised.


Designing an experiment as game is a good way to achieve this. Hosting the experiment online we could reach a broad audience. Hundreds of participants where exposed to the production one of the others and challenged to be creative. Each player had to create artistic representation of given concepts and guess the subject of other players’ creations. Players were exposed to previous creations, could be inspired, could decide to imitate. They also gave a feedback on other players’ productions giving them a value.


From this experiment we were able to reproduce the presence and the alternance of trends in the production. We defined measures of the originality of a composition and of the value that was awarded to if from the rest of the community. We validated this measures thanks to the data available on the players activity.
To reach this result we developed a creativity measure.  We introduced a creativity measure that allows us to dive deeper into the problem we’re studying and show what is the reaction to creativity and how creations with similar originality may be successful and be considered as creative or not depending on their timely creation. that works by redistributing the credit for the creation of a new composition to the inspirers based on the degree of similarity of the creations and their originality and then from the inspirers to their own models and back to the beginning of the experiment. In this process only those compositions that are strongly original and have been followed by many are able to keep a larger share of credit emerging as the creative ones.


We found how old ideas become creative again after some time.


Both the experimental technique and the measure of creativity are original elements that may be recognized as creative in the future. Bigger and longer experiments of this kind may show with even greater detail the dynamics of cultural and innovative systems allowing to measure behaviors that are known at the popular level and never observed experimentally. The creativity measure can be adapted and tested in other contexts and may be in the future an useful tool in the hands of creatives and policy makers.