Historically creativity has been seen as something mysterious and innate. However, in recent years many courses and books promise to teach how to be creative. This shows a change in the perception of creativity as something whose mechanics may be learnt and studied. Psychologists were the first to study creativity, focusing their studies on the creativity of the individual. The great effort required to get data about a vast group of people forced this approach. 


Technological advances allow now to study creativity from a quantitative point of view,. Modern technologies allow to reach a larger number of individuals, record their actions and to compare their production. The development of web application allows collect data about any kind of creative product, may it be a piece of art, a written text or a new object to be mass-produced. These new opportunities allow to get more quantitative research and to study the creativity content of the individual products.


Scholars, creatives and investors are all interested in the creative content of products. The problem of measuring creativity is extremely challenging from a theoretical point of view. It requires the design of a completely new set of tools. Few of the existing tools can be used without adjustments and all have to prove to be valid. Scholars can now study the factors that contribute to make a product creative. They can try to distinguish creative products from merely successful ones. Creatives and investors in creativity may have many benefits from this research. Having a better understanding of how creativity works may help them in saving time and catch opportunities.


Progress in this field has been slowed down by the difficulties in finding adequate data. For example data available on the web allow studies on large systems but with little control over which data are recorded. This often negates the possibility to get a strong external validation of the findings. Researchers find difficult to prove that a theory is better than another in explaining the phenomena. With this kind of data is also difficult to study the fine details of the dynamics of the system. The mechanics that determines the success or the failure of a product may remain concealed. 


An experiment can reproduce in vitro the key features of a creative process. The approach in use until now is based on the observation of a creative system more than in its reproduction. The creators of online databases and archives have aims different from science. The controlled environment of an experiment allows studying creativity without the bias introduced in web-borne data.


Designing the experiment is not easy as creativity is not related only to the product features. It depends both on the degree of innovation the product introduces and in the success it gains. Complete originality often leads to uselessness or being incomprehensible. The product won’t be purchased, imitated, praised. On the other hand, a highly valued product may come just exploiting existing standards. This too is not creative. Creativity is a matter of balance and its measurement requires knowing the whole history of the cultural, technological or scientific system.


The reproduction of creativity dynamics has some intrinsic difficulties. Originality has to be measured against previous production and value is gained following the reactions that a product stimulates. This requires many interacting individuals to be involved. The participants must have a catchy creative goal to achieve. The researchers must be able to keep the maximum information about the creative process. Recruiting enough participants is a hard and expensive task.


Designing an experiment as a game is a good way to achieve this. Game experiments have already been used in many disciplines. Also, online games have been used for example to benefit of human computational power in folding proteins. We decided to host our experiment online and this allowed us to reach a broad audience. Hundreds of participants were exposed to the production one of the others and challenged to be creative. Each player had to create an artistic representation of given concepts and guess the subject of other players’ creations. Players were exposed to previous creations, could be inspired, could decide to imitate and gave feedback on other players’ productions.


With our experiment, we were able to reproduce a creative system. The reduction from the real world observation to the experiment kept the main features of the system. The experiment reproduced the presence and the alternance of trends observed in the real world. We could measure the originality of every composition and the value that was awarded from the rest of the community. We validated these measures thanks to the data available on the players’ activity.


We introduced a creativity measure to study how this changes with time. Each player has been inspired by some previous composition. They keep ideas that seems good to them and replace replace the bad ones with something original. Looking at the similarities among compositions, we can track these inspirations up to the very beginning of the experiment. We can measure a composition’s creativity with these inspiration data. Each composition receives a score from later compositions proportional to their influence on them. Of this score, the composition will keep a share proportional to its originality. The rest is distributed to the composition’s influencers. In this process, only those compositions that are strongly original and have been followed by many others are able to keep a larger share of credit. These will emerge as the creative ones.




We found how old ideas become creative again after some time. We investigated what is the reaction to creativity. Creative elements are the trendsetters. The same composition appearing a bit earlier or later may result extremely creative or not at all. This may be common sense but a less immediate result comes, even if we measure creativity against the whole production. The same idea can become creative again after some time. This mechanism is at the base of the alternation of trends.


Both the experimental technique and the measure of creativity are original elements that may be recognized as creative in the future. Bigger and longer experiments of this kind may show with even greater detail the dynamics of cultural and innovative systems allowing to measure behaviors that are known at the popular level and never observed experimentally. The creativity measure can be adapted and tested in other contexts and may be in the future a useful tool in the hands of creatives and policymakers.