technological advances Historically creativity has been seen as something misterius and innate. In recent years however we see flourishing courses and books promising to teach how to be creative. This shows a change in the perception of creativity as something whose mechanics may be learnt and studied. Creativity as a field of study has been traditionally part of the psychologists work. Now, thanks to that allowed to observe the actions and production of many individuals at the same time, it is possible to tackle the problem from a more quantitative point of view.


When focusing on the product -- may it be a piece of art, a written text or a new object to be mass-produced -- is widely accepted that it’s creativity depend both on the degree of innovation it introduces and in the success it earns. Complete originality often leads to uselessness or being incomprehensible thus the product won’t be purchased, imitated, praised. Studying the factors that contribute to make a product creative and how to distinguish creative products from simply successful ones is of great interest bot for creatives and for those who invest in the creatives’ work.


Up to now progresses in this field have been slowed by the difficulties in finding data suitable to sustain or deny any theory. Data available on the web or other massive sources allow studies on large systems but usually they lack the possibility to get a strong external validation of their findings or to study the fine details of the dynamics that determines the success or the failure of a product or even good ways to determine the originality and influence paths.


Here we present a new kind of experiment that is able to reproduce in vitro the evolution of a system whose agents pursue creativity. In this experiment hundreds of participants where exposed to the production one of the others and challenged to be creative. The experiment was in the form of a game and hosted online in order to reach the broader audience possible. Each player has to create artistic representation of given concepts and guess the subject of other players’ creations. Players were so exposed to previous creations, could be inspired, could decide to imitate. They also give a feedback on other players’ productions contributing to give them a value. This experiment  thus reproduced the key features of a creative process allowing us to study the dynamics and the mechanics of creativity.


From this experiment we were able to reproduce the presence and the alternance of trends in the production. We defined measures of the originality of a composition and of the value that was awarded to if from the rest of the community. We validated this measures thanks to the data available on the players activity. We introduced a creativity measure that allows us to dive deeper into the problem we’re studying and show what is the reaction to creativity and how creations with similar originality may be successful and be considered as creative or not depending on their timely creation.


To reach this result we developed a creativity measure that works by redistributing the credit for the creation of a new composition to the inspirers based on the degree of similarity of the creations and their originality and then from the inspirers to their own models and back to the beginning of the experiment. In this process only those compositions that are strongly original and have been followed by many are able to keep a larger share of credit emerging as the creative ones.


Both the experimental technique introduced and the measure of creativity are original elements that may be recognized as creative in the future. Bigger and longer experiments of this kind may show with even greater detail the dynamics of cultural and innovative systems allowing to measure behaviors that are known at the popular level and never observed experimentally. The creativity measure can be adapted and tested in other contexts and may be in the future an useful tool in the hands of creatives and policy makers.